Part I 01 My Early Home The first place that I can well remember was a large pleasant meadow with a pond of clear water in it .
Some shady trees leaned over it , and rushes and water-lilies grew at the deep end .
Over the hedge on one side we looked into a plowed field , and on the other we looked over a gate at our master ’s house , which stood by the roadside ; at the top of the meadow was a grove of fir trees , and at the bottom a running brook overhung by a steep bank .
While I was young I lived upon my mother ’s milk , as I could not eat grass .
In the daytime I ran by her side , and at night I lay down close by her .
When it was hot we used to stand by the pond in the shade of the trees , and when it was cold we had a nice warm shed near the grove .
As soon as I was old enough to eat grass my mother used to go out to work in the daytime , and come back in the evening .
There were six young colts in the meadow besides me ; they were older than I was ; some were nearly as large as grown-up horses .
I used to run with them , and had great fun ; we used to gallop all together round and round the field as hard as we could go .
Sometimes we had rather rough play , for they would frequently bite and kick as well as gallop .
One day , when there was a good deal of kicking , my mother whinnied to me to come to her , and then she said : “ I wish you to pay attention to what I am going to say to you .
The colts who live here are very good colts , but they are cart-horse colts , and of course they have not learned manners .
You have been well-bred and well-born ; your father has a great name in these parts , and your grandfather won the cup two years at the Newmarket races ; your grandmother had the sweetest temper of any horse I ever knew , and I think you have never seen me kick or bite .
I hope you will grow up gentle and good , and never learn bad ways ; do your work with a good will , lift your feet up well when you trot , and never bite or kick even in play . ”
I have never forgotten my mother ’s advice ; I knew she was a wise old horse , and our master thought a great deal of her .
Her name was Duchess , but he often called her Pet .
Our master was a good , kind man .
He gave us good food , good lodging , and kind words ; he spoke as kindly to us as he did to his little children .
We were all fond of him , and my mother loved him very much .
When she saw him at the gate she would neigh with joy , and trot up to him .
He would pat and stroke her and say , “ Well , old Pet , and how is your little Darkie ? ”
I was a dull black , so he called me Darkie ; then he would give me a piece of bread , which was very good , and sometimes he brought a carrot for my mother .
All the horses would come to him , but I think we were his favorites .
My mother always took him to the town on a market day in a light gig .
There was a plowboy , Dick , who sometimes came into our field to pluck blackberries from the hedge .
When he had eaten all he wanted he would have what he called fun with the colts , throwing stones and sticks at them to make them gallop .
We did not much mind him , for we could gallop off ; but sometimes a stone would hit and hurt us .
One day he was at this game , and did not know that the master was in the next field ; but he was there , watching what was going on ; over the hedge he jumped in a snap , and catching Dick by the arm , he gave him such a box on the ear as made him roar with the pain and surprise .
As soon as we saw the master we trotted up nearer to see what went on .
“ Bad boy ! ” he said , “ bad boy !
to chase the colts .
This is not the first time , nor the second , but it shall be the last .
There -- take your money and go home ; I shall not want you on my farm again . ”
So we never saw Dick any more .
Old Daniel , the man who looked after the horses , was just as gentle as our master , so we were well off .
02 The Hunt Before I was two years old a circumstance happened which I have never forgotten .
It was early in the spring ; there had been a little frost in the night , and a light mist still hung over the woods and meadows .
I and the other colts were feeding at the lower part of the field when we heard , quite in the distance , what sounded like the cry of dogs .
The oldest of the colts raised his head , pricked his ears , and said , “ There are the hounds ! ” and immediately cantered off , followed by the rest of us to the upper part of the field , where we could look over the hedge and see several fields beyond .
My mother and an old riding horse of our master ’s were also standing near , and seemed to know all about it .
“ They have found a hare , ” said my mother , “ and if they come this way we shall see the hunt . ”
And soon the dogs were all tearing down the field of young wheat next to ours .
I never heard such a noise as they made .
They did not bark , nor howl , nor whine , but kept on a “ yo !
yo , o , o !
yo !
yo , o , o ! ” at the top of their voices .
After them came a number of men on horseback , some of them in green coats , all galloping as fast as they could .
The old horse snorted and looked eagerly after them , and we young colts wanted to be galloping with them , but they were soon away into the fields lower down ; here it seemed as if they had come to a stand ; the dogs left off barking , and ran about every way with their noses to the ground .
“ They have lost the scent , ” said the old horse ; “ perhaps the hare will get off . ”
“ What hare ? ”
I said .
“ Oh !
I do n’t know what hare ; likely enough it may be one of our own hares out of the woods ; any hare they can find will do for the dogs and men to run after ; ” and before long the dogs began their “ yo !
yo , o , o ! ” again , and back they came altogether at full speed , making straight for our meadow at the part where the high bank and hedge overhang the brook .
“ Now we shall see the hare , ” said my mother ; and just then a hare wild with fright rushed by and made for the woods .
On came the dogs ; they burst over the bank , leaped the stream , and came dashing across the field followed by the huntsmen .
Six or eight men leaped their horses clean over , close upon the dogs .
The hare tried to get through the fence ; it was too thick , and she turned sharp round to make for the road , but it was too late ; the dogs were upon her with their wild cries ; we heard one shriek , and that was the end of her .
One of the huntsmen rode up and whipped off the dogs , who would soon have torn her to pieces .
He held her up by the leg torn and bleeding , and all the gentlemen seemed well pleased .
As for me , I was so astonished that I did not at first see what was going on by the brook ; but when I did look there was a sad sight ; two fine horses were down , one was struggling in the stream , and the other was groaning on the grass .
One of the riders was getting out of the water covered with mud , the other lay quite still .
“ His neck is broke , ” said my mother .
“ And serve him right , too , ” said one of the colts .
I thought the same , but my mother did not join with us .
“ Well , no , ” she said , “ you must not say that ; but though I am an old horse , and have seen and heard a great deal , I never yet could make out why men are so fond of this sport ; they often hurt themselves , often spoil good horses , and tear up the fields , and all for a hare or a fox , or a stag , that they could get more easily some other way ; but we are only horses , and do n’t know . ”
While my mother was saying this we stood and looked on .
Many of the riders had gone to the young man ; but my master , who had been watching what was going on , was the first to raise him .
His head fell back and his arms hung down , and every one looked very serious .
There was no noise now ; even the dogs were quiet , and seemed to know that something was wrong .
They carried him to our master ’s house .
I heard afterward that it was young George Gordon , the squire ’s only son , a fine , tall young man , and the pride of his family .
There was now riding off in all directions to the doctor ’s , to the farrier ’s , and no doubt to Squire Gordon ’s , to let him know about his son .
When Mr. Bond , the farrier , came to look at the black horse that lay groaning on the grass , he felt him all over , and shook his head ; one of his legs was broken .
Then some one ran to our master ’s house and came back with a gun ; presently there was a loud bang and a dreadful shriek , and then all was still ; the black horse moved no more .
My mother seemed much troubled ; she said she had known that horse for years , and that his name was “ Rob Roy ” ; he was a good horse , and there was no vice in him .
She never would go to that part of the field afterward .
