CHAPTER 1 “ Mine ear is open , and my heart prepared : The worst is wordly loss thou canst unfold : -- Say , is my kingdom lost ? ”
-- Shakespeare It was a feature peculiar to the colonial wars of North America , that the toils and dangers of the wilderness were to be encountered before the adverse hosts could meet .
A wide and apparently an impervious boundary of forests severed the possessions of the hostile provinces of France and England .
The hardy colonist , and the trained European who fought at his side , frequently expended months in struggling against the rapids of the streams , or in effecting the rugged passes of the mountains , in quest of an opportunity to exhibit their courage in a more martial conflict .
But , emulating the patience and self-denial of the practiced native warriors , they learned to overcome every difficulty ; and it would seem that , in time , there was no recess of the woods so dark , nor any secret place so lovely , that it might claim exemption from the inroads of those who had pledged their blood to satiate their vengeance , or to uphold the cold and selfish policy of the distant monarchs of Europe .
Perhaps no district throughout the wide extent of the intermediate frontiers can furnish a livelier picture of the cruelty and fierceness of the savage warfare of those periods than the country which lies between the head waters of the Hudson and the adjacent lakes .
The facilities which nature had there offered to the march of the combatants were too obvious to be neglected .
The lengthened sheet of the Champlain stretched from the frontiers of Canada , deep within the borders of the neighboring province of New York , forming a natural passage across half the distance that the French were compelled to master in order to strike their enemies .
Near its southern termination , it received the contributions of another lake , whose waters were so limpid as to have been exclusively selected by the Jesuit missionaries to perform the typical purification of baptism , and to obtain for it the title of lake “ du Saint Sacrement . ”
The less zealous English thought they conferred a sufficient honor on its unsullied fountains , when they bestowed the name of their reigning prince , the second of the house of Hanover .
The two united to rob the untutored possessors of its wooded scenery of their native right to perpetuate its original appellation of “ Horican . ”
* * As each nation of the Indians had its language or its dialect , they usually gave different names to the same places , though nearly all of their appellations were descriptive of the object .
Thus a literal translation of the name of this beautiful sheet of water , used by the tribe that dwelt on its banks , would be “ The Tail of the Lake . ”
Lake George , as it is vulgarly , and now , indeed , legally , called , forms a sort of tail to Lake Champlain , when viewed on the map .
Hence , the name .
Winding its way among countless islands , and imbedded in mountains , the “ holy lake ” extended a dozen leagues still further to the south .
With the high plain that there interposed itself to the further passage of the water , commenced a portage of as many miles , which conducted the adventurer to the banks of the Hudson , at a point where , with the usual obstructions of the rapids , or rifts , as they were then termed in the language of the country , the river became navigable to the tide .
While , in the pursuit of their daring plans of annoyance , the restless enterprise of the French even attempted the distant and difficult gorges of the Alleghany , it may easily be imagined that their proverbial acuteness would not overlook the natural advantages of the district we have just described .
It became , emphatically , the bloody arena , in which most of the battles for the mastery of the colonies were contested .
Forts were erected at the different points that commanded the facilities of the route , and were taken and retaken , razed and rebuilt , as victory alighted on the hostile banners .
While the husbandman shrank back from the dangerous passes , within the safer boundaries of the more ancient settlements , armies larger than those that had often disposed of the scepters of the mother countries , were seen to bury themselves in these forests , whence they rarely returned but in skeleton bands , that were haggard with care or dejected by defeat .
Though the arts of peace were unknown to this fatal region , its forests were alive with men ; its shades and glens rang with the sounds of martial music , and the echoes of its mountains threw back the laugh , or repeated the wanton cry , of many a gallant and reckless youth , as he hurried by them , in the noontide of his spirits , to slumber in a long night of forgetfulness .
It was in this scene of strife and bloodshed that the incidents we shall attempt to relate occurred , during the third year of the war which England and France last waged for the possession of a country that neither was destined to retain .
The imbecility of her military leaders abroad , and the fatal want of energy in her councils at home , had lowered the character of Great Britain from the proud elevation on which it had been placed by the talents and enterprise of her former warriors and statesmen .
No longer dreaded by her enemies , her servants were fast losing the confidence of self-respect .
In this mortifying abasement , the colonists , though innocent of her imbecility , and too humble to be the agents of her blunders , were but the natural participators .
They had recently seen a chosen army from that country , which , reverencing as a mother , they had blindly believed invincible -- an army led by a chief who had been selected from a crowd of trained warriors , for his rare military endowments , disgracefully routed by a handful of French and Indians , and only saved from annihilation by the coolness and spirit of a Virginian boy , whose riper fame has since diffused itself , with the steady influence of moral truth , to the uttermost confines of Christendom .
* A wide frontier had been laid naked by this unexpected disaster , and more substantial evils were preceded by a thousand fanciful and imaginary dangers .
The alarmed colonists believed that the yells of the savages mingled with every fitful gust of wind that issued from the interminable forests of the west .
The terrific character of their merciless enemies increased immeasurably the natural horrors of warfare .
Numberless recent massacres were still vivid in their recollections ; nor was there any ear in the provinces so deaf as not to have drunk in with avidity the narrative of some fearful tale of midnight murder , in which the natives of the forests were the principal and barbarous actors .
As the credulous and excited traveler related the hazardous chances of the wilderness , the blood of the timid curdled with terror , and mothers cast anxious glances even at those children which slumbered within the security of the largest towns .
In short , the magnifying influence of fear began to set at naught the calculations of reason , and to render those who should have remembered their manhood , the slaves of the basest passions .
Even the most confident and the stoutest hearts began to think the issue of the contest was becoming doubtful ; and that abject class was hourly increasing in numbers , who thought they foresaw all the possessions of the English crown in America subdued by their Christian foes , or laid waste by the inroads of their relentless allies .
* Washington , who , after uselessly admonishing the European general of the danger into which he was heedlessly running , saved the remnants of the British army , on this occasion , by his decision and courage .
The reputation earned by Washington in this battle was the principal cause of his being selected to command the American armies at a later day .
It is a circumstance worthy of observation , that while all America rang with his well-merited reputation , his name does not occur in any European account of the battle ; at least the author has searched for it without success .
In this manner does the mother country absorb even the fame , under that system of rule .
When , therefore , intelligence was received at the fort which covered the southern termination of the portage between the Hudson and the lakes , that Montcalm had been seen moving up the Champlain , with an army “ numerous as the leaves on the trees , ” its truth was admitted with more of the craven reluctance of fear than with the stern joy that a warrior should feel , in finding an enemy within reach of his blow .
The news had been brought , toward the decline of a day in midsummer , by an Indian runner , who also bore an urgent request from Munro , the commander of a work on the shore of the “ holy lake , ” for a speedy and powerful reinforcement .
It has already been mentioned that the distance between these two posts was less than five leagues .
The rude path , which originally formed their line of communication , had been widened for the passage of wagons ; so that the distance which had been traveled by the son of the forest in two hours , might easily be effected by a detachment of troops , with their necessary baggage , between the rising and setting of a summer sun .
The loyal servants of the British crown had given to one of these forest-fastnesses the name of William Henry , and to the other that of Fort Edward , calling each after a favorite prince of the reigning family .
The veteran Scotchman just named held the first , with a regiment of regulars and a few provincials ; a force really by far too small to make head against the formidable power that Montcalm was leading to the foot of his earthen mounds .
At the latter , however , lay General Webb , who commanded the armies of the king in the northern provinces , with a body of more than five thousand men .
By uniting the several detachments of his command , this officer might have arrayed nearly double that number of combatants against the enterprising Frenchman , who had ventured so far from his reinforcements , with an army but little superior in numbers .
But under the influence of their degraded fortunes , both officers and men appeared better disposed to await the approach of their formidable antagonists , within their works , than to resist the progress of their march , by emulating the successful example of the French at Fort du Quesne , and striking a blow on their advance .
After the first surprise of the intelligence had a little abated , a rumor was spread through the entrenched camp , which stretched along the margin of the Hudson , forming a chain of outworks to the body of the fort itself , that a chosen detachment of fifteen hundred men was to depart , with the dawn , for William Henry , the post at the northern extremity of the portage .
That which at first was only rumor , soon became certainty , as orders passed from the quarters of the commander-in-chief to the several corps he had selected for this service , to prepare for their speedy departure .
All doubts as to the intention of Webb now vanished , and an hour or two of hurried footsteps and anxious faces succeeded .
The novice in the military art flew from point to point , retarding his own preparations by the excess of his violent and somewhat distempered zeal ; while the more practiced veteran made his arrangements with a deliberation that scorned every appearance of haste ; though his sober lineaments and anxious eye sufficiently betrayed that he had no very strong professional relish for the , as yet , untried and dreaded warfare of the wilderness .
At length the sun set in a flood of glory , behind the distant western hills , and as darkness drew its veil around the secluded spot the sounds of preparation diminished ; the last light finally disappeared from the log cabin of some officer ; the trees cast their deeper shadows over the mounds and the rippling stream , and a silence soon pervaded the camp , as deep as that which reigned in the vast forest by which it was environed .
