I am a rather elderly man .
The nature of my avocations for the last thirty years has brought me into more than ordinary contact with what would seem an interesting and somewhat singular set of men , of whom as yet nothing that I know of has ever been written : -- I mean the law-copyists or scriveners .
I have known very many of them , professionally and privately , and if I pleased , could relate divers histories , at which good-natured gentlemen might smile , and sentimental souls might weep .
But I waive the biographies of all other scriveners for a few passages in the life of Bartleby , who was a scrivener of the strangest I ever saw or heard of .
While of other law-copyists I might write the complete life , of Bartleby nothing of that sort can be done .
I believe that no materials exist for a full and satisfactory biography of this man .
It is an irreparable loss to literature .
Bartleby was one of those beings of whom nothing is ascertainable , except from the original sources , and in his case those are very small .
What my own astonished eyes saw of Bartleby , _ that _ is all I know of him , except , indeed , one vague report which will appear in the sequel .
Ere introducing the scrivener , as he first appeared to me , it is fit I make some mention of myself , my _ employees _ , my business , my chambers , and general surroundings ; because some such description is indispensable to an adequate understanding of the chief character about to be presented .
Imprimis : I am a man who , from his youth upwards , has been filled with a profound conviction that the easiest way of life is the best .
Hence , though I belong to a profession proverbially energetic and nervous , even to turbulence , at times , yet nothing of that sort have I ever suffered to invade my peace .
I am one of those unambitious lawyers who never addresses a jury , or in any way draws down public applause ; but in the cool tranquility of a snug retreat , do a snug business among rich men 's bonds and mortgages and title-deeds .
All who know me , consider me an eminently _ safe _ man .
The late John Jacob Astor , a personage little given to poetic enthusiasm , had no hesitation in pronouncing my first grand point to be prudence ; my next , method .
I do not speak it in vanity , but simply record the fact , that I was not unemployed in my profession by the late John Jacob Astor ; a name which , I admit , I love to repeat , for it hath a rounded and orbicular sound to it , and rings like unto bullion .
I will freely add , that I was not insensible to the late John Jacob Astor 's good opinion .
Some time prior to the period at which this little history begins , my avocations had been largely increased .
The good old office , now extinct in the State of New York , of a Master in Chancery , had been conferred upon me .
It was not a very arduous office , but very pleasantly remunerative .
I seldom lose my temper ; much more seldom indulge in dangerous indignation at wrongs and outrages ; but I must be permitted to be rash here and declare , that I consider the sudden and violent abrogation of the office of Master in Chancery , by the new Constitution , as a -- premature act ; inasmuch as I had counted upon a life-lease of the profits , whereas I only received those of a few short years .
But this is by the way .
My chambers were up stairs at No .
-- Wall-street .
At one end they looked upon the white wall of the interior of a spacious sky-light shaft , penetrating the building from top to bottom .
This view might have been considered rather tame than otherwise , deficient in what landscape painters call " life . "
But if so , the view from the other end of my chambers offered , at least , a contrast , if nothing more .
In that direction my windows commanded an unobstructed view of a lofty brick wall , black by age and everlasting shade ; which wall required no spy-glass to bring out its lurking beauties , but for the benefit of all near-sighted spectators , was pushed up to within ten feet of my window panes .
Owing to the great height of the surrounding buildings , and my chambers being on the second floor , the interval between this wall and mine not a little resembled a huge square cistern .
At the period just preceding the advent of Bartleby , I had two persons as copyists in my employment , and a promising lad as an office-boy .
First , Turkey ; second , Nippers ; third , Ginger Nut .
These may seem names , the like of which are not usually found in the Directory .
In truth they were nicknames , mutually conferred upon each other by my three clerks , and were deemed expressive of their respective persons or characters .
Turkey was a short , pursy Englishman of about my own age , that is , somewhere not far from sixty .
In the morning , one might say , his face was of a fine florid hue , but after twelve o'clock , meridian -- his dinner hour -- it blazed like a grate full of Christmas coals ; and continued blazing -- but , as it were , with a gradual wane -- till 6 o'clock , P.M. or thereabouts , after which I saw no more of the proprietor of the face , which gaining its meridian with the sun , seemed to set with it , to rise , culminate , and decline the following day , with the like regularity and undiminished glory .
There are many singular coincidences I have known in the course of my life , not the least among which was the fact , that exactly when Turkey displayed his fullest beams from his red and radiant countenance , just then , too , at that critical moment , began the daily period when I considered his business capacities as seriously disturbed for the remainder of the twenty-four hours .
Not that he was absolutely idle , or averse to business then ; far from it .
The difficulty was , he was apt to be altogether too energetic .
There was a strange , inflamed , flurried , flighty recklessness of activity about him .
He would be incautious in dipping his pen into his inkstand .
All his blots upon my documents , were dropped there after twelve o'clock , meridian .
Indeed , not only would he be reckless and sadly given to making blots in the afternoon , but some days he went further , and was rather noisy .
At such times , too , his face flamed with augmented blazonry , as if cannel coal had been heaped on anthracite .
He made an unpleasant racket with his chair ; spilled his sand-box ; in mending his pens , impatiently split them all to pieces , and threw them on the floor in a sudden passion ; stood up and leaned over his table , boxing his papers about in a most indecorous manner , very sad to behold in an elderly man like him .
Nevertheless , as he was in many ways a most valuable person to me , and all the time before twelve o'clock , meridian , was the quickest , steadiest creature too , accomplishing a great deal of work in a style not easy to be matched -- for these reasons , I was willing to overlook his eccentricities , though indeed , occasionally , I remonstrated with him .
I did this very gently , however , because , though the civilest , nay , the blandest and most reverential of men in the morning , yet in the afternoon he was disposed , upon provocation , to be slightly rash with his tongue , in fact , insolent .
Now , valuing his morning services as I did , and resolved not to lose them ; yet , at the same time made uncomfortable by his inflamed ways after twelve o'clock ; and being a man of peace , unwilling by my admonitions to call forth unseemly retorts from him ; I took upon me , one Saturday noon ( he was always worse on Saturdays ) , to hint to him , very kindly , that perhaps now that he was growing old , it might be well to abridge his labors ; in short , he need not come to my chambers after twelve o'clock , but , dinner over , had best go home to his lodgings and rest himself till teatime .
But no ; he insisted upon his afternoon devotions .
His countenance became intolerably fervid , as he oratorically assured me -- gesticulating with a long ruler at the other end of the room -- that if his services in the morning were useful , how indispensable , then , in the afternoon ?
" With submission , sir , " said Turkey on this occasion , " I consider myself your right-hand man .
In the morning I but marshal and deploy my columns ; but in the afternoon I put myself at their head , and gallantly charge the foe , thus ! "
-- and he made a violent thrust with the ruler .
" But the blots , Turkey , " intimated I. " True , -- but , with submission , sir , behold these hairs !
I am getting old .
Surely , sir , a blot or two of a warm afternoon is not to be severely urged against gray hairs .
Old age -- even if it blot the page -- is honorable .
With submission , sir , we _ both _ are getting old . "
This appeal to my fellow-feeling was hardly to be resisted .
At all events , I saw that go he would not .
So I made up my mind to let him stay , resolving , nevertheless , to see to it , that during the afternoon he had to do with my less important papers .
Nippers , the second on my list , was a whiskered , sallow , and , upon the whole , rather piratical-looking young man of about five and twenty .
I always deemed him the victim of two evil powers -- ambition and indigestion .
The ambition was evinced by a certain impatience of the duties of a mere copyist , an unwarrantable usurpation of strictly professional affairs , such as the original drawing up of legal documents .
The indigestion seemed betokened in an occasional nervous testiness and grinning irritability , causing the teeth to audibly grind together over mistakes committed in copying ; unnecessary maledictions , hissed , rather than spoken , in the heat of business ; and especially by a continual discontent with the height of the table where he worked .
Though of a very ingenious mechanical turn , Nippers could never get this table to suit him .
He put chips under it , blocks of various sorts , bits of pasteboard , and at last went so far as to attempt an exquisite adjustment by final pieces of folded blotting paper .
But no invention would answer .
If , for the sake of easing his back , he brought the table lid at a sharp angle well up towards his chin , and wrote there like a man using the steep roof of a Dutch house for his desk : -- then he declared that it stopped the circulation in his arms .
If now he lowered the table to his waistbands , and stooped over it in writing , then there was a sore aching in his back .
In short , the truth of the matter was , Nippers knew not what he wanted .
Or , if he wanted any thing , it was to be rid of a scrivener 's table altogether .
Among the manifestations of his diseased ambition was a fondness he had for receiving visits from certain ambiguous-looking fellows in seedy coats , whom he called his clients .
Indeed I was aware that not only was he , at times , considerable of a ward-politician , but he occasionally did a little business at the Justices ' courts , and was not unknown on the steps of the Tombs .
I have good reason to believe , however , that one individual who called upon him at my chambers , and who , with a grand air , he insisted was his client , was no other than a dun , and the alleged title-deed , a bill .
But with all his failings , and the annoyances he caused me , Nippers , like his compatriot Turkey , was a very useful man to me ; wrote a neat , swift hand ; and , when he chose , was not deficient in a gentlemanly sort of deportment .
Added to this , he always dressed in a gentlemanly sort of way ; and so , incidentally , reflected credit upon my chambers .
Whereas with respect to Turkey , I had much ado to keep him from being a reproach to me .
His clothes were apt to look oily and smell of eating-houses .
He wore his pantaloons very loose and baggy in summer .
His coats were execrable ; his hat not to be handled .
But while the hat was a thing of indifference to me , inasmuch as his natural civility and deference , as a dependent Englishman , always led him to doff it the moment he entered the room , yet his coat was another matter .
Concerning his coats , I reasoned with him ; but with no effect .
The truth was , I suppose , that a man of so small an income , could not afford to sport such a lustrous face and a lustrous coat at one and the same time .
As Nippers once observed , Turkey 's money went chiefly for red ink .
One winter day I presented Turkey with a highly-respectable looking coat of my own , a padded gray coat , of a most comfortable warmth , and which buttoned straight up from the knee to the neck .
I thought Turkey would appreciate the favor , and abate his rashness and obstreperousness of afternoons .
But no .
I verily believe that buttoning himself up in so downy and blanket-like a coat had a pernicious effect upon him ; upon the same principle that too much oats are bad for horses .
In fact , precisely as a rash , restive horse is said to feel his oats , so Turkey felt his coat .
It made him insolent .
He was a man whom prosperity harmed .
