CHAPTER I .
THE TWO POETS OF SAFFRON PARK THE suburb of Saffron Park lay on the sunset side of London , as red and ragged as a cloud of sunset .
It was built of a bright brick throughout ; its sky-line was fantastic , and even its ground plan was wild .
It had been the outburst of a speculative builder , faintly tinged with art , who called its architecture sometimes Elizabethan and sometimes Queen Anne , apparently under the impression that the two sovereigns were identical .
It was described with some justice as an artistic colony , though it never in any definable way produced any art .
But although its pretensions to be an intellectual centre were a little vague , its pretensions to be a pleasant place were quite indisputable .
The stranger who looked for the first time at the quaint red houses could only think how very oddly shaped the people must be who could fit in to them .
Nor when he met the people was he disappointed in this respect .
The place was not only pleasant , but perfect , if once he could regard it not as a deception but rather as a dream .
Even if the people were not “ artists , ” the whole was nevertheless artistic .
That young man with the long , auburn hair and the impudent face -- that young man was not really a poet ; but surely he was a poem .
That old gentleman with the wild , white beard and the wild , white hat -- that venerable humbug was not really a philosopher ; but at least he was the cause of philosophy in others .
That scientific gentleman with the bald , egg-like head and the bare , bird-like neck had no real right to the airs of science that he assumed .
He had not discovered anything new in biology ; but what biological creature could he have discovered more singular than himself ?
Thus , and thus only , the whole place had properly to be regarded ; it had to be considered not so much as a workshop for artists , but as a frail but finished work of art .
A man who stepped into its social atmosphere felt as if he had stepped into a written comedy .
More especially this attractive unreality fell upon it about nightfall , when the extravagant roofs were dark against the afterglow and the whole insane village seemed as separate as a drifting cloud .
This again was more strongly true of the many nights of local festivity , when the little gardens were often illuminated , and the big Chinese lanterns glowed in the dwarfish trees like some fierce and monstrous fruit .
And this was strongest of all on one particular evening , still vaguely remembered in the locality , of which the auburn-haired poet was the hero .
It was not by any means the only evening of which he was the hero .
On many nights those passing by his little back garden might hear his high , didactic voice laying down the law to men and particularly to women .
The attitude of women in such cases was indeed one of the paradoxes of the place .
Most of the women were of the kind vaguely called emancipated , and professed some protest against male supremacy .
Yet these new women would always pay to a man the extravagant compliment which no ordinary woman ever pays to him , that of listening while he is talking .
And Mr. Lucian Gregory , the red-haired poet , was really ( in some sense ) a man worth listening to , even if one only laughed at the end of it .
He put the old cant of the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness with a certain impudent freshness which gave at least a momentary pleasure .
He was helped in some degree by the arresting oddity of his appearance , which he worked , as the phrase goes , for all it was worth .
His dark red hair parted in the middle was literally like a woman ’s , and curved into the slow curls of a virgin in a pre-Raphaelite picture .
From within this almost saintly oval , however , his face projected suddenly broad and brutal , the chin carried forward with a look of cockney contempt .
This combination at once tickled and terrified the nerves of a neurotic population .
He seemed like a walking blasphemy , a blend of the angel and the ape .
This particular evening , if it is remembered for nothing else , will be remembered in that place for its strange sunset .
It looked like the end of the world .
All the heaven seemed covered with a quite vivid and palpable plumage ; you could only say that the sky was full of feathers , and of feathers that almost brushed the face .
Across the great part of the dome they were grey , with the strangest tints of violet and mauve and an unnatural pink or pale green ; but towards the west the whole grew past description , transparent and passionate , and the last red-hot plumes of it covered up the sun like something too good to be seen .
The whole was so close about the earth , as to express nothing but a violent secrecy .
The very empyrean seemed to be a secret .
It expressed that splendid smallness which is the soul of local patriotism .
The very sky seemed small .
I say that there are some inhabitants who may remember the evening if only by that oppressive sky .
There are others who may remember it because it marked the first appearance in the place of the second poet of Saffron Park .
For a long time the red-haired revolutionary had reigned without a rival ; it was upon the night of the sunset that his solitude suddenly ended .
The new poet , who introduced himself by the name of Gabriel Syme was a very mild-looking mortal , with a fair , pointed beard and faint , yellow hair .
But an impression grew that he was less meek than he looked .
He signalised his entrance by differing with the established poet , Gregory , upon the whole nature of poetry .
He said that he ( Syme ) was poet of law , a poet of order ; nay , he said he was a poet of respectability .
So all the Saffron Parkers looked at him as if he had that moment fallen out of that impossible sky .
In fact , Mr. Lucian Gregory , the anarchic poet , connected the two events .
“ It may well be , ” he said , in his sudden lyrical manner , “ it may well be on such a night of clouds and cruel colours that there is brought forth upon the earth such a portent as a respectable poet .
You say you are a poet of law ; I say you are a contradiction in terms .
I only wonder there were not comets and earthquakes on the night you appeared in this garden . ”
The man with the meek blue eyes and the pale , pointed beard endured these thunders with a certain submissive solemnity .
The third party of the group , Gregory ’s sister Rosamond , who had her brother ’s braids of red hair , but a kindlier face underneath them , laughed with such mixture of admiration and disapproval as she gave commonly to the family oracle .
Gregory resumed in high oratorical good humour .
“ An artist is identical with an anarchist , ” he cried .
“ You might transpose the words anywhere .
An anarchist is an artist .
The man who throws a bomb is an artist , because he prefers a great moment to everything .
He sees how much more valuable is one burst of blazing light , one peal of perfect thunder , than the mere common bodies of a few shapeless policemen .
An artist disregards all governments , abolishes all conventions .
The poet delights in disorder only .
If it were not so , the most poetical thing in the world would be the Underground Railway . ”
“ So it is , ” said Mr. Syme .
“ Nonsense ! ” said Gregory , who was very rational when anyone else attempted paradox .
“ Why do all the clerks and navvies in the railway trains look so sad and tired , so very sad and tired ?
I will tell you .
It is because they know that the train is going right .
It is because they know that whatever place they have taken a ticket for that place they will reach .
It is because after they have passed Sloane Square they know that the next station must be Victoria , and nothing but Victoria .
Oh , their wild rapture !
oh , their eyes like stars and their souls again in Eden , if the next station were unaccountably Baker Street ! ”
“ It is you who are unpoetical , ” replied the poet Syme .
“ If what you say of clerks is true , they can only be as prosaic as your poetry .
The rare , strange thing is to hit the mark ; the gross , obvious thing is to miss it .
We feel it is epical when man with one wild arrow strikes a distant bird .
Is it not also epical when man with one wild engine strikes a distant station ?
Chaos is dull ; because in chaos the train might indeed go anywhere , to Baker Street or to Bagdad .
But man is a magician , and his whole magic is in this , that he does say Victoria , and lo !
it is Victoria .
No , take your books of mere poetry and prose ; let me read a time table , with tears of pride .
Take your Byron , who commemorates the defeats of man ; give me Bradshaw , who commemorates his victories .
Give me Bradshaw , I say ! ”
“ Must you go ? ” inquired Gregory sarcastically .
“ I tell you , ” went on Syme with passion , “ that every time a train comes in I feel that it has broken past batteries of besiegers , and that man has won a battle against chaos .
You say contemptuously that when one has left Sloane Square one must come to Victoria .
I say that one might do a thousand things instead , and that whenever I really come there I have the sense of hairbreadth escape .
And when I hear the guard shout out the word ‘ Victoria , ’ it is not an unmeaning word .
It is to me the cry of a herald announcing conquest .
It is to me indeed ‘ Victoria ’ ; it is the victory of Adam . ”
Gregory wagged his heavy , red head with a slow and sad smile .
“ And even then , ” he said , “ we poets always ask the question , ‘ And what is Victoria now that you have got there ? ’
You think Victoria is like the New Jerusalem .
We know that the New Jerusalem will only be like Victoria .
Yes , the poet will be discontented even in the streets of heaven .
The poet is always in revolt . ”
“ There again , ” said Syme irritably , “ what is there poetical about being in revolt ?
You might as well say that it is poetical to be sea-sick .
Being sick is a revolt .
Both being sick and being rebellious may be the wholesome thing on certain desperate occasions ; but I ’m hanged if I can see why they are poetical .
Revolt in the abstract is -- revolting .
It ’s mere vomiting . ”
