Chapter I .
The Missing Heir .
" Uncle , you are not looking well to-night . "
" I 'm not well , Florence .
I sometimes doubt if I shall ever be any better . "
" Surely , uncle , you can not mean ---- " " Yes , my child , I have reason to believe that I am nearing the end . "
" I can not bear to hear you speak so , uncle , " said Florence Linden , in irrepressible agitation .
" You are not an old man .
You are but fifty-four . "
" True , Florence , but it is not years only that make a man old .
Two great sorrows have embittered my life .
First , the death of my dearly beloved wife , and next , the loss of my boy , Harvey . "
" It is long since I have heard you refer to my cousin 's loss .
I thought you had become reconciled -- no , I do not mean that , -- I thought your regret might be less poignant . "
" I have not permitted myself to speak of it , but I have never ceased to think of it day and night . "
John Linden paused sadly , then resumed : " If he had died , I might , as you say , have become reconciled ; but he was abducted at the age of four by a revengeful servant whom I had discharged from my employment .
Heaven knows whether he is living or dead , but it is impressed upon my mind that he still lives , it may be in misery , it may be as a criminal , while I , his unhappy father , live on in luxury which I can not enjoy , with no one to care for me ---- " Florence Linden sank impulsively on her knees beside her uncle 's chair .
" Do n't say that , uncle , " she pleaded .
" You know that I love you , Uncle John . "
" And I , too , uncle . "
There was a shade of jealousy in the voice of Curtis Waring as he entered the library through the open door , and approaching his uncle , pressed his hand .
He was a tall , dark-complexioned man , of perhaps thirty-five , with shifty , black eyes and thin lips , shaded by a dark mustache .
It was not a face to trust .
Even when he smiled the expression of his face did not soften .
Yet he could moderate his voice so as to express tenderness and sympathy .
He was the son of an elder sister of Mr. Linden , while Florence was the daughter of a younger brother .
Both were orphans , and both formed a part of Mr. Linden 's household , and owed everything to his bounty .
Curtis was supposed to be in some business downtown ; but he received a liberal allowance from his uncle , and often drew upon him for outside assistance .
As he stood with his uncle 's hand in his , he was necessarily brought near Florence , who instinctively drew a little away , with a slight shudder indicating repugnance .
Slight as it was , Curtis detected it , and his face darkened .
John Linden looked from one to the other .
" Yes , " he said , " I must not forget that I have a nephew and a niece .
You are both dear to me , but no one can take the place of the boy I have lost . "
" But it is so long ago , uncle , " said Curtis .
" It must be fourteen years . "
" It is fourteen years . "
" And the boy is long since dead ! "
" No , no ! " said John Linden , vehemently .
" I do not , I will not , believe it .
He still lives , and I live only in the hope of one day clasping him in my arms . "
" That is very improbable , uncle , " said Curtis , in a tone of annoyance .
" There is n't one chance in a hundred that my cousin still lives .
The grave has closed over him long since .
The sooner you make up your mind to accept the inevitable the better . "
The drawn features of the old man showed that the words had a depressing effect upon his mind , but Florence interrupted her cousin with an indignant protest .
" How can you speak so , Curtis ? " she exclaimed .
" Leave Uncle John the hope that he has so long cherished .
I have a presentiment that Harvey still lives . "
John Linden 's face brightened up " You , too , believe it possible , Florence ? " he said , eagerly .
" Yes , uncle .
I not only believe it possible , but probable .
How old would Harvey be if he still lived ? "
" Eighteen -- nearly a year older than yourself . "
" How strange !
I always think of him as a little boy . "
" And I , too , Florence .
He rises before me in his little velvet suit , as he was when I last saw him , with his sweet , boyish face , in which his mother 's looks were reflected . "
" Yet , if still living , " interrupted Curtis , harshly , " he is a rough street boy , perchance serving his time at Blackwell 's Island , and , a hardened young ruffian , whom it would be bitter mortification to recognize as your son . "
" That 's the sorrowful part of it , " said his uncle , in a voice of anguish .
" That is what I most dread . "
" Then , since even if he were living you would not care to recognize him , why not cease to think of him , or else regard him as dead ? "
" Curtis Waring , have you no heart ? " demanded Florence , indignantly .
" Indeed , Florence , you ought to know , " said Curtis , sinking his voice into softly modulated accents .
" I know nothing of it , " said Florence , coldly , rising from her recumbent position , and drawing aloof from Curtis .
" You know that the dearest wish of my heart is to find favor in your eyes .
Uncle , you know my wish , and approve of it , do you not ? "
" Yes , Curtis ; you and Florence are equally dear to me , and it is my hope that you may be united .
In that case , there will be no division of my fortune .
It will be left to you jointly . "
" Believe me , sir , " said Curtis , with faltering voice , feigning an emotion which he did not feel , " believe me , that I fully appreciate your goodness .
I am sure Florence joins with me ---- " " Florence can speak for herself , " said his cousin , coldly .
" My uncle needs no assurance from me .
He is always kind , and I am always grateful . "
John Linden seemed absorbed in thought .
" I do not doubt your affection , " he said ; " and I have shown it by making you my joint heirs in the event of your marriage ; but it is only fair to say that my property goes to my boy , if he still lives . "
" But , sir , " protested Curtis , " is not that likely to create unnecessary trouble ?
It can never be known , and meanwhile ---- " " You and Florence will hold the property in trust . "
" Have you so specified in your will ? " asked Curtis .
" I have made two wills .
Both are in yonder secretary .
By the first the property is bequeathed to you and Florence .
By the second and later , it goes to my lost boy in the event of his recovery .
Of course , you and Florence are not forgotten , but the bulk of the property goes to Harvey . "
" I sincerely wish the boy might be restored to you , " said Curtis ; but his tone belied his words .
" Believe me , the loss of the property would affect me little , if you could be made happy by realizing your warmest desire ; but , uncle , I think it only the part of a friend to point out to you , as I have already done , the baselessness of any such expectation . "
" It may be as you say , Curtis , " said his uncle , with a sigh .
" If I were thoroughly convinced of it , I would destroy the later will , and leave my property absolutely to you and Florence . "
" No , uncle , " said Florence , impulsively , " make no change ; let the will stand . "
Curtis , screened from his uncle 's view , darted a glance of bitter indignation at Florence .
" Is the girl mad ? " he muttered to himself .
" Must she forever balk me ? "
" Let it be so for the present , then , " said Mr. Linden , wearily .
" Curtis , will you ring the bell ?
I am tired , and shall retire to my couch early . "
" Let me help you , Uncle John , " said Florence , eagerly .
" It is too much for your strength , my child .
I am growing more and more helpless . "
" I , too , can help , " said Curtis .
John Linden , supported on either side by his nephew and niece , left the room , and was assisted to his chamber .
Curtis and Florence returned to the library .
" Florence , " said her cousin , " my uncle 's intentions , as expressed to-night , make it desirable that there should be an understanding between us .
Take a seat beside me " -- leading her to a sofa -- " and let us talk this matter over . "
With a gesture of repulsion Florence declined the proffered seat , and remained standing .
" As you please , " she answered , coldly .
" Will you be seated ? "
" No ; our interview will be brief . "
" Then I will come to the point .
Uncle John wishes to see us united . "
" It can never be ! " said Florence , decidedly .
Curtis bit his lip in mortification , for her tone was cold and scornful .
Mingled with this mortification was genuine regret , for , so far as he was capable of loving any one , he loved his fair young cousin .
" You profess to love Uncle John , and yet you would disappoint his cherished hope ! " he returned .
" Is it his cherished hope ? "
" There is no doubt about it .
He has spoken to me more than once on the subject .
Feeling that his end is near , he wishes to leave you in charge of a protector . "
