CHAPTER 1 Mrs Gildea had settled early to her morning 's work in what she called the veranda-study of her cottage in Leichardt 's Town .
It was a primitive cottage of the old style , standing in a garden and built on the cliff -- the Emu Point side -- overlooking the broad Leichardt River .
The veranda , quite twelve feet wide , ran -- Australian fashion -- along the front of the cottage , except for the two closed-in ends forming , one a bathroom and the other a kind of store closet .
Being raised a few feet above the ground , the veranda was enclosed by a wooden railing , and this and the supporting posts were twined with creepers that must have been planted at least thirty years .
One of these , a stephanotis , showed masses of white bloom , which Joan Gildea casually reflected would have fetched a pretty sum in Covent Garden , and , joining in with a fine-growing asparagus fern , formed an arch over the entrance steps .
The end of the veranda , where Mrs Gildea had established herself with her type-writer and paraphernalia of literary work , was screened by a thick-stemmed grape-vine , which made a dapple of shadow and sunshine upon the boarded floor .
Some bunches of late grapes -- it was the very beginning of March -- hung upon the vine , and , at the other end of the veranda , grew a passion creeper , its great purple fruit looking like huge plums amidst its vivid green leaves .
The roof of the veranda was low , with projecting eaves , below which a bunch of yellowing bananas hung to ripen .
In fact , the veranda and garden beyond would have been paradise to a fruitarian .
Against the wall of the store-room , stood a large tin dish piled with melons , pine-apples and miscellaneous garden produce , while , between the veranda posts , could be seen a guava-tree , an elderly fig and a loquat all in full bearing .
The garden seemed a tangle of all manner of vegetation -- an oleander in bloom , a poinsettia , a yucca , lifting its spike of waxen white blossoms , a narrow flower-border in which the gardenias had become tall shrubs and the scented verbena shrubs almost trees .
As for the blend of perfume , it was dreamily intoxicating .
Two bamboos , guarding the side entrance gate , made a soft whispering that heightened the dream-sense .
The bottom of the garden looked an inchoate mass of greenery topped by the upper boughs of tall straggling gum trees , growing outside where the ground fell gradually to the river .
From where Mrs Gildea sat , she had a view of almost the whole reach of the river where it circles Emu Point .
For , as is known to all who know Leichardt 's Town , the river winds in two great loops girdling two low points , so that , in striking a bee-line across the whole town , business and residential , one must cross the river three times .
Mrs Gildea could see the plan of the main street in the Middle Point and the roofs of shops and offices .
The busy wharves of the Leichardt 's Land Steam Navigation Company -- familiarly , the L.L.S.N. Co. -- lay opposite on her right , while leftward , across the water , she could trace , as far as the grape-vine would allow , the boundary of the Botanical Gardens and get a sight of the white stone and grey slate end of the big Parliamentary Buildings .
The heat-haze over the town and the brilliant sun-sparkles on the river suggested a cruel glare outside the shady veranda and over-grown old garden .
A pleasant study , if a bit distracting from its plenitude of associations to Australian-born Joan Gildea , who , on her marriage , had been transplanted into English soil , as care-free as a rose cut from the parent stem , and who now , after nearly twenty years , had returned to the scene of her youth -- a widow , a working journalist and shorn of most of her early illusions .
Her typewriter stood on a bamboo table before her .
A pile of Australian Hansards for reference sat on a chair at convenient distance .
A large table with a green cloth , at her elbow , had at one end a tray with the remains of her breakfast of tea , scones and fruit .
The end nearest her was littered with sheaves of manuscript , newspaper-cuttings , photographs and sepia sketches -- obviously for purposes of illustration : gum-bottle , stylographs and the rest , with , also , several note-books held open by bananas , recently plucked from the ripening bunch , to serve as paper-weights .
She had meant to be very busy that morning .
There was her weekly letter for THE IMPERIALIST to send off by to-morrow 's mail , and , moreover , she had to digest the reasons of the eminent journal for returning to her an article that had not met with the editor 's approval -- the great Gibbs : a potent newspaper-factor in the British policy of the day .
It had been an immense honour when Mr Gibbs had chosen Joan Gildea from amongst his staff for a roving commission to report upon the political , financial , economic and social aspects of Australia , and upon Imperial interests generally , as represented in various sideshows on her route .
But it happened that she was now suffering from a change at the last moment in that route -- a substitution of the commplace P. & O. for the more exciting Canadian Pacific , Mr Gibbs having suddenly decided that Imperialism in Australia demanded his special correspondent 's immediate attention .
For this story dates back to the time when Mr Joseph Chamberlain was in office ; when Imperialism , Free Trade and Yellow Labour were the catch words of a party , and before the great Australian Commonwealth had become an historical fact .
THE IMPERIALIST 's Special Correspondent looked worried .
She was wondering whether the English mail expected to-day would bring her troublesome editorial instructions .
She examined some of the photographs and drawings with a dissatisfied air .
A running inarticulate commentary might have been put into words like this : ' No good ... I can manage the letterpress all right once I get the hang of things .
But when it comes to illustrations , I ca n't make even a gum-tree look as if it was growing ... .
And Gibbs hates having amateur snapshots to work up ... .
Hopeless to try for a local artist ... .
I wonder if Colin McKeith could give me an idea .... .
Why to goodness did n't Biddy join me !
... .
If she 'd only had the decency to let me know in time WHY she could n't ... .
Money , I suppose -- or a Man !
... .
Well , I 'll write and tell her never to expect a literary leg-up from me again ... ' Mrs Gildea pulled the sheet she had been typing out of the machine , inserted another , altered the notch to single spacing and rattled off at top speed till the page was covered .
The she appended her signature and wrote this address : To the Lady Bridget O'Hara , Care of Eliza Countess of Gaverick , Upper Brook Street , London , W. on an envelope , into which she slipped her letter -- a letter never to be sent .
A snap of the gate between the bamboos added a metallic note to the tree 's reedy whimperings , and the postman tramped along the short garden path and up the veranda steps .
' Morning , Mrs Gildea ... a heavy mail for you ! '
He planked down the usual editorial packet -- two or three rolls of proofs , a collection of newspapers , a bulky parcel of private correspondence sent on by the porter of Mrs Gildea 's London flat , some local letters and , finally , two square envelopes , with the remark , as he turned away on his round .
' My word !
Mrs Gildea , those letters seem to have done a bit of globe-trotting on their own , do n't they ! '
For the envelopes were covered with directions , some in Japanese and Chinese hieroglyphics , some in official red ink from various postoffices , a few with the distinctive markings of British Legations and Government Houses where the Special Correspondent should have stayed , but did not -- Only her own name showing through the obliterations , and a final re-addressing by the Bank of Leichardt 's Land .
Mrs Gildea recognised the impulsive , untidy but characteristic handwriting of Lady Bridget O'Hara .
' From Biddy at last ! '
she exclaimed , tore the flap of number one letter , paused and laid it aside .
' Business first . '
So she went carefully through the editorial communication .
Mr Gibbs was not quite so tiresome as she had feared he would be .
After him , the packet from her London flat was inspected and its contents laid aside for future perusal .
Next , she tackled the local letters .
One was embossed with the Bank of Leichardt 's Land stamp and contained a cablegram originally despatched from Rome , which had been received at Vancouver and , thence , had pursued her -- first along the route originally designed , afterwards , with zigzagging , retrogression and much delay , along the one she had taken .
That it had reached her at all , said a good deal for Mrs Gildea 's fame as a freely paragraphed newspaper correspondent .
The telegram was phrased thus : SORRY IMPOSSIBLE NO FUNDS OTHER REASONS WRITING BIDDY Mrs Gildea 's illuminative ' H 'm ! '
implied that her two inductions had been correct .
No funds -- and other reasons -- meaning -- a MAN .
She scented instantly another of Biddy 's tempestuous love-affairs .
Had it been merely a question of lack of money with inclination goading , she felt pretty certain that Lady Bridget would have contrived to beg , borrow or steal -- on a hazardous promissory note , after the happy-go-lucky financial morals of that section of society to which by birth she belonged .
Or , failing these means , that she would have threatened some mad enterprise and so have frightened her aunt Eliza Countess of Gaverick into writing a cheque for three figures .
Of course , less would have been of no account .
Mrs Gildea opened the two envelopes and sorted the pages in order of their dates .
The first had the address of a house in South Belgravia , where lived Sir Luke Tallant of the Colonial Office and Rosamond his wife -- distant connections of the Gavericks .
Lady Bridget 's letters were type-written , most carelessly , with the mistakes corrected down the margin of the flimsy sheets in the manner of author 's proof -- the whole appearance of them suggesting literary ' copy ' .
Likewise , the slapdash epistolary style of the MS. , which had a certain vividness of its own .
CHAPTER 2 ' Dearest Joan , You 'll have got my wire .
Vancouver was right , I suppose .
I sent it from Rome .
Since then I have been at Montreux with Chris and Molly , and since I came back to England with them , I 've been in too chaotic a state of mind to write letters .
Really , Chris and Molly 's atmosphere of struggling to keep in the swim on next to nothing a year and of eking out a precarious income by visits to second-rate country houses and cadging on their London friends gets on my nerves to such an extent that Luke and Rosamond 's established " Colonial Office " sort of respectability is quite refreshing by contrast .
