VOLUME I CHAPTER I Emma Woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate , indulgent father ; and had , in consequence of her sister 's marriage , been mistress of his house from a very early period .
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess , who had fallen little short of a mother in affection .
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse 's family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughters , but particularly of Emma .
Between _ them _ it was more the intimacy of sisters .
Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming Miss Taylor 's judgment , but directed chiefly by her own .
The real evils , indeed , of Emma 's situation were the power of having rather too much her own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments .
The danger , however , was at present so unperceived , that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her .
Sorrow came -- a gentle sorrow -- but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness .
-- Miss Taylor married .
It was Miss Taylor 's loss which first brought grief .
It was on the wedding-day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
The wedding over , and the bride-people gone , her father and herself were left to dine together , with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening .
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
The event had every promise of happiness for her friend .
Mr. Weston was a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self-denying , generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match ; but it was a black morning 's work for her .
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
She recalled her past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen years -- how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old -- how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health -- and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood .
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella 's marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed : intelligent , well-informed , useful , gentle , knowing all the ways of the family , interested in all its concerns , and peculiarly interested in herself , in every pleasure , every scheme of hers -- one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose , and who had such an affection for her as could never find fault .
How was she to bear the change ?
-- It was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them ; but Emma was aware that great must be the difference between a Mrs. Weston , only half a mile from them , and a Miss Taylor in the house ; and with all her advantages , natural and domestic , she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude .
She dearly loved her father , but he was no companion for her .
He could not meet her in conversation , rational or playful .
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages ( and Mr. Woodhouse had not married early ) was much increased by his constitution and habits ; for having been a valetudinarian all his life , without activity of mind or body , he was a much older man in ways than in years ; and though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable temper , his talents could not have recommended him at any time .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
Highbury , the large and populous village , almost amounting to a town , to which Hartfield , in spite of its separate lawn , and shrubberies , and name , did really belong , afforded her no equals .
The Woodhouses were first in consequence there .
All looked up to them .
She had many acquaintance in the place , for her father was universally civil , but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even half a day .
It was a melancholy change ; and Emma could not but sigh over it , and wish for impossible things , till her father awoke , and made it necessary to be cheerful .
His spirits required support .
He was a nervous man , easily depressed ; fond of every body that he was used to , and hating to part with them ; hating change of every kind .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter 's marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could , to keep him from such thoughts ; but when tea came , it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner , “ Poor Miss Taylor !
-- I wish she were here again .
What a pity it is that Mr. Weston ever thought of her ! ”
“ I can not agree with you , papa ; you know I can not .
Mr. Weston is such a good-humoured , pleasant , excellent man , that he thoroughly deserves a good wife ; -- and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever , and bear all my odd humours , when she might have a house of her own ? ”
“ A house of her own !
-- But where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
This is three times as large .
-- And you have never any odd humours , my dear . ”
“ How often we shall be going to see them , and they coming to see us !
-- We shall be always meeting !
_ We _ must begin ; we must go and pay wedding visit very soon . ”
“ My dear , how am I to get so far ?
Randalls is such a distance .
I could not walk half so far . ”
“ No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
We must go in the carriage , to be sure . ”
“ The carriage !
But James will not like to put the horses to for such a little way ; -- and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ? ”
“ They are to be put into Mr. Weston 's stable , papa .
You know we have settled all that already .
We talked it all over with Mr. Weston last night .
And as for James , you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls , because of his daughter 's being housemaid there .
I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else .
That was your doing , papa .
You got Hannah that good place .
Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her -- James is so obliged to you ! ”
“ I am very glad I did think of her .
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty-spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
Whenever James goes over to see his daughter , you know , she will be hearing of us .
He will be able to tell her how we all are . ”
Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas , and hoped , by the help of backgammon , to get her father tolerably through the evening , and be attacked by no regrets but her own .
The backgammon-table was placed ; but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary .
Mr. Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella 's husband .
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
He had returned to a late dinner , after some days ' absence , and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square .
It was a happy circumstance , and animated Mr. Woodhouse for some time .
Mr. Knightley had a cheerful manner , which always did him good ; and his many inquiries after “ poor Isabella ” and her children were answered most satisfactorily .
When this was over , Mr. Woodhouse gratefully observed , “ It is very kind of you , Mr. Knightley , to come out at this late hour to call upon us .
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk . ”
“