I A green and yellow parrot , which hung in a cage outside the door , kept repeating over and over : “ Allez vous-en !
Allez vous-en !
Sapristi !
That 's all right ! ”
He could speak a little Spanish , and also a language which nobody understood , unless it was the mocking-bird that hung on the other side of the door , whistling his fluty notes out upon the breeze with maddening persistence .
Mr. Pontellier , unable to read his newspaper with any degree of comfort , arose with an expression and an exclamation of disgust .
He walked down the gallery and across the narrow “ bridges ” which connected the Lebrun cottages one with the other .
He had been seated before the door of the main house .
The parrot and the mockingbird were the property of Madame Lebrun , and they had the right to make all the noise they wished .
Mr. Pontellier had the privilege of quitting their society when they ceased to be entertaining .
He stopped before the door of his own cottage , which was the fourth one from the main building and next to the last .
Seating himself in a wicker rocker which was there , he once more applied himself to the task of reading the newspaper .
The day was Sunday ; the paper was a day old .
The Sunday papers had not yet reached Grand Isle .
He was already acquainted with the market reports , and he glanced restlessly over the editorials and bits of news which he had not had time to read before quitting New Orleans the day before .
Mr. Pontellier wore eye-glasses .
He was a man of forty , of medium height and rather slender build ; he stooped a little .
His hair was brown and straight , parted on one side .
His beard was neatly and closely trimmed .
Once in a while he withdrew his glance from the newspaper and looked about him .
There was more noise than ever over at the house .
The main building was called “ the house , ” to distinguish it from the cottages .
The chattering and whistling birds were still at it .
Two young girls , the Farival twins , were playing a duet from “ Zampa ” upon the piano .
Madame Lebrun was bustling in and out , giving orders in a high key to a yard-boy whenever she got inside the house , and directions in an equally high voice to a dining-room servant whenever she got outside .
She was a fresh , pretty woman , clad always in white with elbow sleeves .
Her starched skirts crinkled as she came and went .
Farther down , before one of the cottages , a lady in black was walking demurely up and down , telling her beads .
A good many persons of the pension had gone over to the Cheniere Caminada in Beaudelet 's lugger to hear mass .
Some young people were out under the wateroaks playing croquet .
Mr. Pontellier 's two children were there -- sturdy little fellows of four and five .
A quadroon nurse followed them about with a faraway , meditative air .
Mr. Pontellier finally lit a cigar and began to smoke , letting the paper drag idly from his hand .
He fixed his gaze upon a white sunshade that was advancing at snail 's pace from the beach .
He could see it plainly between the gaunt trunks of the water-oaks and across the stretch of yellow camomile .
The gulf looked far away , melting hazily into the blue of the horizon .
The sunshade continued to approach slowly .
Beneath its pink-lined shelter were his wife , Mrs. Pontellier , and young Robert Lebrun .
When they reached the cottage , the two seated themselves with some appearance of fatigue upon the upper step of the porch , facing each other , each leaning against a supporting post .
“ What folly !
to bathe at such an hour in such heat ! ”
exclaimed Mr. Pontellier .
He himself had taken a plunge at daylight .
That was why the morning seemed long to him .
“ You are burnt beyond recognition , ” he added , looking at his wife as one looks at a valuable piece of personal property which has suffered some damage .
She held up her hands , strong , shapely hands , and surveyed them critically , drawing up her fawn sleeves above the wrists .
Looking at them reminded her of her rings , which she had given to her husband before leaving for the beach .
She silently reached out to him , and he , understanding , took the rings from his vest pocket and dropped them into her open palm .
She slipped them upon her fingers ; then clasping her knees , she looked across at Robert and began to laugh .
The rings sparkled upon her fingers .
He sent back an answering smile .
“ What is it ? ”
asked Pontellier , looking lazily and amused from one to the other .
It was some utter nonsense ; some adventure out there in the water , and they both tried to relate it at once .
It did not seem half so amusing when told .
They realized this , and so did Mr. Pontellier .
He yawned and stretched himself .
Then he got up , saying he had half a mind to go over to Klein 's hotel and play a game of billiards .
“ Come go along , Lebrun , ” he proposed to Robert .
But Robert admitted quite frankly that he preferred to stay where he was and talk to Mrs. Pontellier .
“ Well , send him about his business when he bores you , Edna , ” instructed her husband as he prepared to leave .
“ Here , take the umbrella , ” she exclaimed , holding it out to him .
He accepted the sunshade , and lifting it over his head descended the steps and walked away .
“ Coming back to dinner ? ”
his wife called after him .
He halted a moment and shrugged his shoulders .
He felt in his vest pocket ; there was a ten-dollar bill there .
He did not know ; perhaps he would return for the early dinner and perhaps he would not .
It all depended upon the company which he found over at Klein 's and the size of “ the game . ”
He did not say this , but she understood it , and laughed , nodding good-by to him .
Both children wanted to follow their father when they saw him starting out .
He kissed them and promised to bring them back bonbons and peanuts .
II Mrs. Pontellier 's eyes were quick and bright ; they were a yellowish brown , about the color of her hair .
She had a way of turning them swiftly upon an object and holding them there as if lost in some inward maze of contemplation or thought .
Her eyebrows were a shade darker than her hair .
They were thick and almost horizontal , emphasizing the depth of her eyes .
She was rather handsome than beautiful .
Her face was captivating by reason of a certain frankness of expression and a contradictory subtle play of features .
Her manner was engaging .
Robert rolled a cigarette .
He smoked cigarettes because he could not afford cigars , he said .
He had a cigar in his pocket which Mr. Pontellier had presented him with , and he was saving it for his after-dinner smoke .
This seemed quite proper and natural on his part .
In coloring he was not unlike his companion .
A clean-shaved face made the resemblance more pronounced than it would otherwise have been .
There rested no shadow of care upon his open countenance .
His eyes gathered in and reflected the light and languor of the summer day .
Mrs. Pontellier reached over for a palm-leaf fan that lay on the porch and began to fan herself , while Robert sent between his lips light puffs from his cigarette .
They chatted incessantly : about the things around them ; their amusing adventure out in the water -- it had again assumed its entertaining aspect ; about the wind , the trees , the people who had gone to the Cheniere ; about the children playing croquet under the oaks , and the Farival twins , who were now performing the overture to “ The Poet and the Peasant . ”
Robert talked a good deal about himself .
He was very young , and did not know any better .
Mrs. Pontellier talked a little about herself for the same reason .
Each was interested in what the other said .
Robert spoke of his intention to go to Mexico in the autumn , where fortune awaited him .
He was always intending to go to Mexico , but some way never got there .
Meanwhile he held on to his modest position in a mercantile house in New Orleans , where an equal familiarity with English , French and Spanish gave him no small value as a clerk and correspondent .
He was spending his summer vacation , as he always did , with his mother at Grand Isle .
In former times , before Robert could remember , “ the house ” had been a summer luxury of the Lebruns .
Now , flanked by its dozen or more cottages , which were always filled with exclusive visitors from the “ Quartier Francais , ” it enabled Madame Lebrun to maintain the easy and comfortable existence which appeared to be her birthright .
Mrs. Pontellier talked about her father 's Mississippi plantation and her girlhood home in the old Kentucky bluegrass country .
She was an American woman , with a small infusion of French which seemed to have been lost in dilution .
She read a letter from her sister , who was away in the East , and who had engaged herself to be married .
Robert was interested , and wanted to know what manner of girls the sisters were , what the father was like , and how long the mother had been dead .
When Mrs. Pontellier folded the letter it was time for her to dress for the early dinner .
“ I see Leonce is n't coming back , ” she said , with a glance in the direction whence her husband had disappeared .
Robert supposed he was not , as there were a good many New Orleans club men over at Klein 's .
When Mrs. Pontellier left him to enter her room , the young man descended the steps and strolled over toward the croquet players , where , during the half-hour before dinner , he amused himself with the little Pontellier children , who were very fond of him .
III It was eleven o'clock that night when Mr. Pontellier returned from Klein 's hotel .
He was in an excellent humor , in high spirits , and very talkative .
His entrance awoke his wife , who was in bed and fast asleep when he came in .
He talked to her while he undressed , telling her anecdotes and bits of news and gossip that he had gathered during the day .
From his trousers pockets he took a fistful of crumpled bank notes and a good deal of silver coin , which he piled on the bureau indiscriminately with keys , knife , handkerchief , and whatever else happened to be in his pockets .
She was overcome with sleep , and answered him with little half utterances .
