CHAPTER I RAGGED DICK IS INTRODUCED TO THE READER " Wake up there , youngster , " said a rough voice .
Ragged Dick opened his eyes slowly , and stared stupidly in the face of the speaker , but did not offer to get up .
" Wake up , you young vagabond ! "
said the man a little impatiently ; " I suppose you 'd lay there all day , if I had n't called you . "
" What time is it ? "
asked Dick .
" Seven o'clock . "
" Seven o'clock !
I oughter 've been up an hour ago .
I know what 't was made me so precious sleepy .
I went to the Old Bowery last night , and did n't turn in till past twelve . "
" You went to the Old Bowery ?
Where 'd you get your money ? "
asked the man , who was a porter in the employ of a firm doing business on Spruce Street .
" Made it by shines , in course .
My guardian do n't allow me no money for theatres , so I have to earn it . "
" Some boys get it easier than that , " said the porter significantly .
" You do n't catch me stealin ' , if that 's what you mean , " said Dick .
" Do n't you ever steal , then ? "
" No , and I would n't .
Lots of boys does it , but I would n't . "
" Well , I 'm glad to hear you say that .
I believe there 's some good in you , Dick , after all . "
" Oh , I 'm a rough customer ! "
said Dick .
" But I would n't steal .
It 's mean . "
" I 'm glad you think so , Dick , " and the rough voice sounded gentler than at first .
" Have you got any money to buy your breakfast ? "
" No , but I 'll soon get some . "
While this conversation had been going on , Dick had got up .
His bedchamber had been a wooden box half full of straw , on which the young boot-black had reposed his weary limbs , and slept as soundly as if it had been a bed of down .
He dumped down into the straw without taking the trouble of undressing .
Getting up too was an equally short process .
He jumped out of the box , shook himself , picked out one or two straws that had found their way into rents in his clothes , and , drawing a well-worn cap over his uncombed locks , he was all ready for the business of the day .
Dick 's appearance as he stood beside the box was rather peculiar .
His pants were torn in several places , and had apparently belonged in the first instance to a boy two sizes larger than himself .
He wore a vest , all the buttons of which were gone except two , out of which peeped a shirt which looked as if it had been worn a month .
To complete his costume he wore a coat too long for him , dating back , if one might judge from its general appearance , to a remote antiquity .
Washing the face and hands is usually considered proper in commencing the day , but Dick was above such refinement .
He had no particular dislike to dirt , and did not think it necessary to remove several dark streaks on his face and hands .
But in spite of his dirt and rags there was something about Dick that was attractive .
It was easy to see that if he had been clean and well dressed he would have been decidedly good-looking .
Some of his companions were sly , and their faces inspired distrust ; but Dick had a frank , straight-forward manner that made him a favorite .
Dick 's business hours had commenced .
He had no office to open .
His little blacking-box was ready for use , and he looked sharply in the faces of all who passed , addressing each with , " Shine yer boots , sir ? "
" How much ? "
asked a gentleman on his way to his office .
" Ten cents , " said Dick , dropping his box , and sinking upon his knees on the sidewalk , flourishing his brush with the air of one skilled in his profession .
" Ten cents !
Is n't that a little steep ? "
" Well , you know ' taint all clear profit , " said Dick , who had already set to work .
" There 's the _ blacking _ costs something , and I have to get a new brush pretty often . "
" And you have a large rent too , " said the gentleman quizzically , with a glance at a large hole in Dick 's coat .
" Yes , sir , " said Dick , always ready to joke ; " I have to pay such a big rent for my manshun up on Fifth Avenoo , that I ca n't afford to take less than ten cents a shine .
I 'll give you a bully shine , sir . "
" Be quick about it , for I am in a hurry .
So your house is on Fifth Avenue , is it ? "
" It is n't anywhere else , " said Dick , and Dick spoke the truth there .
" What tailor do you patronize ? "
asked the gentleman , surveying Dick 's attire .
" Would you like to go to the same one ? "
asked Dick , shrewdly .
" Well , no ; it strikes me that he did n't give you a very good fit . "
" This coat once belonged to General Washington , " said Dick , comically .
" He wore it all through the Revolution , and it got torn some , 'cause he fit so hard .
When he died he told his widder to give it to some smart young feller that had n't got none of his own ; so she gave it to me .
But if you 'd like it , sir , to remember General Washington by , I 'll let you have it reasonable . "
" Thank you , but I would n't want to deprive you of it .
And did your pants come from General Washington too ? "
" No , they was a gift from Lewis Napoleon .
Lewis had outgrown 'em and sent 'em to me , -- he 's bigger than me , and that 's why they do n't fit . "
" It seems you have distinguished friends .
Now , my lad , I suppose you would like your money . "
" I should n't have any objection , " said Dick .
" I believe , " said the gentleman , examining his pocket-book , " I have n't got anything short of twenty-five cents .
Have you got any change ? "
" Not a cent , " said Dick .
" All my money 's invested in the Erie Railroad . "
" That 's unfortunate . "
" Shall I get the money changed , sir ? "
" I ca n't wait ; I 've got to meet an appointment immediately .
I 'll hand you twenty-five cents , and you can leave the change at my office any time during the day . "
" All right , sir .
Where is it ? "
" No. 125 Fulton Street .
Shall you remember ? "
" Yes , sir .
What name ? "
" Greyson , -- office on second floor . "
" All right , sir ; I 'll bring it . "
" I wonder whether the little scamp will prove honest , " said Mr. Greyson to himself , as he walked away .
" If he does , I 'll give him my custom regularly .
If he do n't as is most likely , I sha n't mind the loss of fifteen cents . "
Mr. Greyson did n't understand Dick .
Our ragged hero was n't a model boy in all respects .
I am afraid he swore sometimes , and now and then he played tricks upon unsophisticated boys from the country , or gave a wrong direction to honest old gentlemen unused to the city .
A clergyman in search of the Cooper Institute he once directed to the Tombs Prison , and , following him unobserved , was highly delighted when the unsuspicious stranger walked up the front steps of the great stone building on Centre Street , and tried to obtain admission .
" I guess he would n't want to stay long if he did get in , " thought Ragged Dick , hitching up his pants .
" Leastways I should n't .
They 're so precious glad to see you that they wo n't let you go , but board you gratooitous , and never send in no bills . "
Another of Dick 's faults was his extravagance .
Being always wide-awake and ready for business , he earned enough to have supported him comfortably and respectably .
There were not a few young clerks who employed Dick from time to time in his professional capacity , who scarcely earned as much as he , greatly as their style and dress exceeded his .
But Dick was careless of his earnings .
Where they went he could hardly have told himself .
However much he managed to earn during the day , all was generally spent before morning .
He was fond of going to the Old Bowery Theatre , and to Tony Pastor 's , and if he had any money left afterwards , he would invite some of his friends in somewhere to have an oyster-stew ; so it seldom happened that he commenced the day with a penny .
Then I am sorry to add that Dick had formed the habit of smoking .
This cost him considerable , for Dick was rather fastidious about his cigars , and would n't smoke the cheapest .
Besides , having a liberal nature , he was generally ready to treat his companions .
But of course the expense was the smallest objection .
No boy of fourteen can smoke without being affected injuriously .
Men are frequently injured by smoking , and boys always .
But large numbers of the newsboys and boot-blacks form the habit .
Exposed to the cold and wet they find that it warms them up , and the self-indulgence grows upon them .
It is not uncommon to see a little boy , too young to be out of his mother 's sight , smoking with all the apparent satisfaction of a veteran smoker .
There was another way in which Dick sometimes lost money .
There was a noted gambling-house on Baxter Street , which in the evening was sometimes crowded with these juvenile gamesters , who staked their hard earnings , generally losing of course , and refreshing themselves from time to time with a vile mixture of liquor at two cents a glass .
Sometimes Dick strayed in here , and played with the rest .
I have mentioned Dick 's faults and defects , because I want it understood , to begin with , that I do n't consider him a model boy .
But there were some good points about him nevertheless .
He was above doing anything mean or dishonorable .
He would not steal , or cheat , or impose upon younger boys , but was frank and straight-forward , manly and self-reliant .
His nature was a noble one , and had saved him from all mean faults .
I hope my young readers will like him as I do , without being blind to his faults .
Perhaps , although he was only a boot-black , they may find something in him to imitate .
