I The Old Pyncheon Family HALFWAY down a by-street of one of our New England towns stands a rusty wooden house , with seven acutely peaked gables , facing towards various points of the compass , and a huge , clustered chimney in the midst .
The street is Pyncheon Street ; the house is the old Pyncheon House ; and an elm-tree , of wide circumference , rooted before the door , is familiar to every town-born child by the title of the Pyncheon Elm .
On my occasional visits to the town aforesaid , I seldom failed to turn down Pyncheon Street , for the sake of passing through the shadow of these two antiquities , -- the great elm-tree and the weather-beaten edifice .
The aspect of the venerable mansion has always affected me like a human countenance , bearing the traces not merely of outward storm and sunshine , but expressive also , of the long lapse of mortal life , and accompanying vicissitudes that have passed within .
Were these to be worthily recounted , they would form a narrative of no small interest and instruction , and possessing , moreover , a certain remarkable unity , which might almost seem the result of artistic arrangement .
But the story would include a chain of events extending over the better part of two centuries , and , written out with reasonable amplitude , would fill a bigger folio volume , or a longer series of duodecimos , than could prudently be appropriated to the annals of all New England during a similar period .
It consequently becomes imperative to make short work with most of the traditionary lore of which the old Pyncheon House , otherwise known as the House of the Seven Gables , has been the theme .
With a brief sketch , therefore , of the circumstances amid which the foundation of the house was laid , and a rapid glimpse at its quaint exterior , as it grew black in the prevalent east wind , -- pointing , too , here and there , at some spot of more verdant mossiness on its roof and walls , -- we shall commence the real action of our tale at an epoch not very remote from the present day .
Still , there will be a connection with the long past -- a reference to forgotten events and personages , and to manners , feelings , and opinions , almost or wholly obsolete -- which , if adequately translated to the reader , would serve to illustrate how much of old material goes to make up the freshest novelty of human life .
Hence , too , might be drawn a weighty lesson from the little-regarded truth , that the act of the passing generation is the germ which may and must produce good or evil fruit in a far-distant time ; that , together with the seed of the merely temporary crop , which mortals term expediency , they inevitably sow the acorns of a more enduring growth , which may darkly overshadow their posterity .
The House of the Seven Gables , antique as it now looks , was not the first habitation erected by civilized man on precisely the same spot of ground .
Pyncheon Street formerly bore the humbler appellation of Maule 's Lane , from the name of the original occupant of the soil , before whose cottage-door it was a cow-path .
A natural spring of soft and pleasant water -- a rare treasure on the sea-girt peninsula where the Puritan settlement was made -- had early induced Matthew Maule to build a hut , shaggy with thatch , at this point , although somewhat too remote from what was then the centre of the village .
In the growth of the town , however , after some thirty or forty years , the site covered by this rude hovel had become exceedingly desirable in the eyes of a prominent and powerful personage , who asserted plausible claims to the proprietorship of this and a large adjacent tract of land , on the strength of a grant from the legislature .
Colonel Pyncheon , the claimant , as we gather from whatever traits of him are preserved , was characterized by an iron energy of purpose .
Matthew Maule , on the other hand , though an obscure man , was stubborn in the defence of what he considered his right ; and , for several years , he succeeded in protecting the acre or two of earth which , with his own toil , he had hewn out of the primeval forest , to be his garden ground and homestead .
No written record of this dispute is known to be in existence .
Our acquaintance with the whole subject is derived chiefly from tradition .
It would be bold , therefore , and possibly unjust , to venture a decisive opinion as to its merits ; although it appears to have been at least a matter of doubt , whether Colonel Pyncheon 's claim were not unduly stretched , in order to make it cover the small metes and bounds of Matthew Maule .
What greatly strengthens such a suspicion is the fact that this controversy between two ill-matched antagonists -- at a period , moreover , laud it as we may , when personal influence had far more weight than now -- remained for years undecided , and came to a close only with the death of the party occupying the disputed soil .
The mode of his death , too , affects the mind differently , in our day , from what it did a century and a half ago .
It was a death that blasted with strange horror the humble name of the dweller in the cottage , and made it seem almost a religious act to drive the plough over the little area of his habitation , and obliterate his place and memory from among men .
Old Matthew Maule , in a word , was executed for the crime of witchcraft .
He was one of the martyrs to that terrible delusion , which should teach us , among its other morals , that the influential classes , and those who take upon themselves to be leaders of the people , are fully liable to all the passionate error that has ever characterized the maddest mob .
Clergymen , judges , statesmen , -- the wisest , calmest , holiest persons of their day stood in the inner circle round about the gallows , loudest to applaud the work of blood , latest to confess themselves miserably deceived .
If any one part of their proceedings can be said to deserve less blame than another , it was the singular indiscrimination with which they persecuted , not merely the poor and aged , as in former judicial massacres , but people of all ranks ; their own equals , brethren , and wives .
Amid the disorder of such various ruin , it is not strange that a man of inconsiderable note , like Maule , should have trodden the martyr 's path to the hill of execution almost unremarked in the throng of his fellow sufferers .
But , in after days , when the frenzy of that hideous epoch had subsided , it was remembered how loudly Colonel Pyncheon had joined in the general cry , to purge the land from witchcraft ; nor did it fail to be whispered , that there was an invidious acrimony in the zeal with which he had sought the condemnation of Matthew Maule .
It was well known that the victim had recognized the bitterness of personal enmity in his persecutor 's conduct towards him , and that he declared himself hunted to death for his spoil .
At the moment of execution -- with the halter about his neck , and while Colonel Pyncheon sat on horseback , grimly gazing at the scene Maule had addressed him from the scaffold , and uttered a prophecy , of which history , as well as fireside tradition , has preserved the very words .
" God , " said the dying man , pointing his finger , with a ghastly look , at the undismayed countenance of his enemy , -- " God will give him blood to drink ! "
After the reputed wizard 's death , his humble homestead had fallen an easy spoil into Colonel Pyncheon 's grasp .
When it was understood , however , that the Colonel intended to erect a family mansion-spacious , ponderously framed of oaken timber , and calculated to endure for many generations of his posterity over the spot first covered by the log-built hut of Matthew Maule , there was much shaking of the head among the village gossips .
Without absolutely expressing a doubt whether the stalwart Puritan had acted as a man of conscience and integrity throughout the proceedings which have been sketched , they , nevertheless , hinted that he was about to build his house over an unquiet grave .
His home would include the home of the dead and buried wizard , and would thus afford the ghost of the latter a kind of privilege to haunt its new apartments , and the chambers into which future bridegrooms were to lead their brides , and where children of the Pyncheon blood were to be born .
The terror and ugliness of Maule 's crime , and the wretchedness of his punishment , would darken the freshly plastered walls , and infect them early with the scent of an old and melancholy house .
Why , then , -- while so much of the soil around him was bestrewn with the virgin forest leaves , -- why should Colonel Pyncheon prefer a site that had already been accurst ?
But the Puritan soldier and magistrate was not a man to be turned aside from his well-considered scheme , either by dread of the wizard 's ghost , or by flimsy sentimentalities of any kind , however specious .
Had he been told of a bad air , it might have moved him somewhat ; but he was ready to encounter an evil spirit on his own ground .
Endowed with commonsense , as massive and hard as blocks of granite , fastened together by stern rigidity of purpose , as with iron clamps , he followed out his original design , probably without so much as imagining an objection to it .
On the score of delicacy , or any scrupulousness which a finer sensibility might have taught him , the Colonel , like most of his breed and generation , was impenetrable .
He therefore dug his cellar , and laid the deep foundations of his mansion , on the square of earth whence Matthew Maule , forty years before , had first swept away the fallen leaves .
It was a curious , and , as some people thought , an ominous fact , that , very soon after the workmen began their operations , the spring of water , above mentioned , entirely lost the deliciousness of its pristine quality .
Whether its sources were disturbed by the depth of the new cellar , or whatever subtler cause might lurk at the bottom , it is certain that the water of Maule 's Well , as it continued to be called , grew hard and brackish .
Even such we find it now ; and any old woman of the neighborhood will certify that it is productive of intestinal mischief to those who quench their thirst there .
The reader may deem it singular that the head carpenter of the new edifice was no other than the son of the very man from whose dead gripe the property of the soil had been wrested .
Not improbably he was the best workman of his time ; or , perhaps , the Colonel thought it expedient , or was impelled by some better feeling , thus openly to cast aside all animosity against the race of his fallen antagonist .
Nor was it out of keeping with the general coarseness and matter-of-fact character of the age , that the son should be willing to earn an honest penny , or , rather , a weighty amount of sterling pounds , from the purse of his father 's deadly enemy .
At all events , Thomas Maule became the architect of the House of the Seven Gables , and performed his duty so faithfully that the timber framework fastened by his hands still holds together .
