_ One _ DREAMS Night fell .
The red waters of the swamp grew sinister and sullen .
The tall pines lost their slimness and stood in wide blurred blotches all across the way , and a great shadowy bird arose , wheeled and melted , murmuring , into the black-green sky .
The boy wearily dropped his heavy bundle and stood still , listening as the voice of crickets split the shadows and made the silence audible .
A tear wandered down his brown cheek .
They were at supper now , he whispered -- the father and old mother , away back yonder beyond the night .
They were far away ; they would never be as near as once they had been , for he had stepped into the world .
And the cat and Old Billy -- ah , but the world was a lonely thing , so wide and tall and empty !
And so bare , so bitter bare !
Somehow he had never dreamed of the world as lonely before ; he had fared forth to beckoning hands and luring , and to the eager hum of human voices , as of some great , swelling music .
Yet now he was alone ; the empty night was closing all about him here in a strange land , and he was afraid .
The bundle with his earthly treasure had hung heavy and heavier on his shoulder ; his little horde of money was tightly wadded in his sock , and the school lay hidden somewhere far away in the shadows .
He wondered how far it was ; he looked and harkened , starting at his own heartbeats , and fearing more and more the long dark fingers of the night .
Then of a sudden up from the darkness came music .
It was human music , but of a wildness and a weirdness that startled the boy as it fluttered and danced across the dull red waters of the swamp .
He hesitated , then impelled by some strange power , left the highway and slipped into the forest of the swamp , shrinking , yet following the song hungrily and half forgetting his fear .
A harsher , shriller note struck in as of many and ruder voices ; but above it flew the first sweet music , birdlike , abandoned , and the boy crept closer .
The cabin crouched ragged and black at the edge of black waters .
An old chimney leaned drunkenly against it , raging with fire and smoke , while through the chinks winked red gleams of warmth and wild cheer .
With a revel of shouting and noise , the music suddenly ceased .
Hoarse staccato cries and peals of laughter shook the old hut , and as the boy stood there peering through the black trees , abruptly the door flew open and a flood of light illumined the wood .
Amid this mighty halo , as on clouds of flame , a girl was dancing .
She was black , and lithe , and tall , and willowy .
Her garments twined and flew around the delicate moulding of her dark , young , half-naked limbs .
A heavy mass of hair clung motionless to her wide forehead .
Her arms twirled and flickered , and body and soul seemed quivering and whirring in the poetry of her motion .
As she danced she sang .
He heard her voice as before , fluttering like a bird 's in the full sweetness of her utter music .
It was no tune nor melody , it was just formless , boundless music .
The boy forgot himself and all the world besides .
All his darkness was sudden light ; dazzled he crept forward , bewildered , fascinated , until with one last wild whirl the elf-girl paused .
The crimson light fell full upon the warm and velvet bronze of her face -- her midnight eyes were aglow , her full purple lips apart , her half hid bosom panting , and all the music dead .
Involuntarily the boy gave a gasping cry and awoke to swamp and night and fire , while a white face , drawn , red-eyed , peered outward from some hidden throng within the cabin .
" Who 's that ? " a harsh voice cried .
" Where ? "
" Who is it ? " and pale crowding faces blurred the light .
The boy wheeled blindly and fled in terror stumbling through the swamp , hearing strange sounds and feeling stealthy creeping hands and arms and whispering voices .
On he toiled in mad haste , struggling toward the road and losing it until finally beneath the shadows of a mighty oak he sank exhausted .
There he lay a while trembling and at last drifted into dreamless sleep .
It was morning when he awoke and threw a startled glance upward to the twisted branches of the oak that bent above , sifting down sunshine on his brown face and close curled hair .
Slowly he remembered the loneliness , the fear and wild running through the dark .
He laughed in the bold courage of day and stretched himself .
Then suddenly he bethought him again of that vision of the night -- the waving arms and flying limbs of the girl , and her great black eyes looking into the night and calling him .
He could hear her now , and hear that wondrous savage music .
Had it been real ?
Had he dreamed ?
Or had it been some witch-vision of the night , come to tempt and lure him to his undoing ?
Where was that black and flaming cabin ?
Where was the girl -- the soul that had called him ?
_ She _ must have been real ; she had to live and dance and sing ; he must again look into the mystery of her great eyes .
And he sat up in sudden determination , and , lo !
gazed straight into the very eyes of his dreaming .
She sat not four feet from him , leaning against the great tree , her eyes now languorously abstracted , now alert and quizzical with mischief .
She seemed but half-clothed , and her warm , dark flesh peeped furtively through the rent gown ; her thick , crisp hair was frowsy and rumpled , and the long curves of her bare young arms gleamed in the morning sunshine , glowing with vigor and life .
A little mocking smile came and sat upon her lips .
" What you run for ? " she asked , with dancing mischief in her eyes .
" Because -- " he hesitated , and his cheeks grew hot .
" I knows , " she said , with impish glee , laughing low music .
" Why ? " he challenged , sturdily .
" You was a-feared . "
He bridled .
" Well , I reckon you 'd be a-feared if you was caught out in the black dark all alone . "
" Pooh ! " she scoffed and hugged her knees .
" Pooh !
I 've stayed out all alone heaps o ' nights . "
He looked at her with a curious awe .
" I do n't believe you , " he asserted ; but she tossed her head and her eyes grew scornful .
" Who 's a-feared of the dark ?
I love night . "
Her eyes grew soft .
He watched her silently , till , waking from her daydream , she abruptly asked : " Where you from ? "
" Georgia . "
" Where 's that ? "
He looked at her in surprise , but she seemed matter-of-fact .
" It 's away over yonder , " he answered .
" Behind where the sun comes up ? "
" Oh , no ! "
" Then it ai n't so far , " she declared .
" I knows where the sun rises , and I knows where it sets . "
She looked up at its gleaming splendor glinting through the leaves , and , noting its height , announced abruptly : " I ' se hungry . "
" So 'm I , " answered the boy , fumbling at his bundle ; and then , timidly : " Will you eat with me ? "
" Yes , " she said , and watched him with eager eyes .
Untying the strips of cloth , he opened his box , and disclosed chicken and biscuits , ham and corn-bread .
She clapped her hands in glee .
" Is there any water near ? " he asked .
Without a word , she bounded up and flitted off like a brown bird , gleaming dull-golden in the sun , glancing in and out among the trees , till she paused above a tiny black pool , and then came tripping and swaying back with hands held cupwise and dripping with cool water .
" Drink , " she cried .
Obediently he bent over the little hands that seemed so soft and thin .
He took a deep draught ; and then to drain the last drop , his hands touched hers and the shock of flesh first meeting flesh startled them both , while the water rained through .
A moment their eyes looked deep into each other 's -- a timid , startled gleam in hers ; a wonder in his .
Then she said dreamily : " We ' se known us all our lives , and -- before , ai n't we ? "
He hesitated .
" Ye -- es -- I reckon , " he slowly returned .
And then , brightening , he asked gayly : " And we 'll be friends always , wo n't we ? "
" Yes , " she said at last , slowly and solemnly , and another brief moment they stood still .
Then the mischief danced in her eyes , and a song bubbled on her lips .
She hopped to the tree .
" Come -- eat ! " she cried .
And they nestled together amid the big black roots of the oak , laughing and talking while they ate .
" What 's over there ? " he asked pointing northward .
" Cresswell 's big house . "
" And yonder to the west ? "
" The school . "
He started joyfully .
" The school !
What school ? "
" Old Miss ' School . "
" Miss Smith 's school ? "
" Yes . "
The tone was disdainful .
" Why , that 's where I 'm going .
I was a-feared it was a long way off ; I must have passed it in the night . "
" I hate it ! " cried the girl , her lips tense .
" But I 'll be so near , " he explained .
" And why do you hate it ? "
" Yes -- you 'll be near , " she admitted ; " that 'll be nice ; but -- " she glanced westward , and the fierce look faded .
Soft joy crept to her face again , and she sat once more dreaming .
" Yon way 's nicest , " she said .
" Why , what 's there ? "
" The swamp , " she said mysteriously .
" And what 's beyond the swamp ? "
She crouched beside him and whispered in eager , tense tones : " Dreams ! "
He looked at her , puzzled .
