I The day broke gray and dull .
The clouds hung heavily , and there was a rawness in the air that suggested snow .
A woman servant came into a room in which a child was sleeping and drew the curtains .
She glanced mechanically at the house opposite , a stucco house with a portico , and went to the child 's bed .
" Wake up , Philip , " she said .
She pulled down the bed-clothes , took him in her arms , and carried him downstairs .
He was only half awake .
" Your mother wants you , " she said .
She opened the door of a room on the floor below and took the child over to a bed in which a woman was lying .
It was his mother .
She stretched out her arms , and the child nestled by her side .
He did not ask why he had been awakened .
The woman kissed his eyes , and with thin , small hands felt the warm body through his white flannel nightgown .
She pressed him closer to herself .
" Are you sleepy , darling ? "
she said .
Her voice was so weak that it seemed to come already from a great distance .
The child did not answer , but smiled comfortably .
He was very happy in the large , warm bed , with those soft arms about him .
He tried to make himself smaller still as he cuddled up against his mother , and he kissed her sleepily .
In a moment he closed his eyes and was fast asleep .
The doctor came forwards and stood by the bed-side .
" Oh , do n't take him away yet , " she moaned .
The doctor , without answering , looked at her gravely .
Knowing she would not be allowed to keep the child much longer , the woman kissed him again ; and she passed her hand down his body till she came to his feet ; she held the right foot in her hand and felt the five small toes ; and then slowly passed her hand over the left one .
She gave a sob .
" What 's the matter ? "
said the doctor .
" You 're tired . "
She shook her head , unable to speak , and the tears rolled down her cheeks .
The doctor bent down .
" Let me take him . "
She was too weak to resist his wish , and she gave the child up .
The doctor handed him back to his nurse .
" You 'd better put him back in his own bed . "
" Very well , sir . "
The little boy , still sleeping , was taken away .
His mother sobbed now broken-heartedly .
" What will happen to him , poor child ? "
The monthly nurse tried to quiet her , and presently , from exhaustion , the crying ceased .
The doctor walked to a table on the other side of the room , upon which , under a towel , lay the body of a still-born child .
He lifted the towel and looked .
He was hidden from the bed by a screen , but the woman guessed what he was doing .
" Was it a girl or a boy ? "
she whispered to the nurse .
" Another boy . "
The woman did not answer .
In a moment the child 's nurse came back .
She approached the bed .
" Master Philip never woke up , " she said .
There was a pause .
Then the doctor felt his patient 's pulse once more .
" I do n't think there 's anything I can do just now , " he said .
" I 'll call again after breakfast . "
" I 'll show you out , sir , " said the child 's nurse .
They walked downstairs in silence .
In the hall the doctor stopped .
" You 've sent for Mrs. Carey 's brother-in-law , have n't you ? "
" Yes , sir . "
" D'you know at what time he 'll be here ? "
" No , sir , I 'm expecting a telegram . "
" What about the little boy ?
I should think he 'd be better out of the way . "
" Miss Watkin said she 'd take him , sir . "
" Who 's she ? "
" She 's his godmother , sir .
D'you think Mrs. Carey will get over it , sir ? "
The doctor shook his head .
II It was a week later .
Philip was sitting on the floor in the drawing-room at Miss Watkin 's house in Onslow gardens .
He was an only child and used to amusing himself .
The room was filled with massive furniture , and on each of the sofas were three big cushions .
There was a cushion too in each arm-chair .
All these he had taken and , with the help of the gilt rout chairs , light and easy to move , had made an elaborate cave in which he could hide himself from the Red Indians who were lurking behind the curtains .
He put his ear to the floor and listened to the herd of buffaloes that raced across the prairie .
Presently , hearing the door open , he held his breath so that he might not be discovered ; but a violent hand pulled away a chair and the cushions fell down .
" You naughty boy , Miss Watkin WILL be cross with you . "
" Hulloa , Emma ! "
he said .
The nurse bent down and kissed him , then began to shake out the cushions , and put them back in their places .
" Am I to come home ? "
he asked .
" Yes , I 've come to fetch you . "
" You 've got a new dress on . "
It was in eighteen-eighty-five , and she wore a bustle .
Her gown was of black velvet , with tight sleeves and sloping shoulders , and the skirt had three large flounces .
She wore a black bonnet with velvet strings .
She hesitated .
The question she had expected did not come , and so she could not give the answer she had prepared .
" Are n't you going to ask how your mamma is ? "
she said at length .
" Oh , I forgot .
How is mamma ? "
Now she was ready .
" Your mamma is quite well and happy . "
" Oh , I am glad . "
" Your mamma 's gone away .
You wo n't ever see her any more . "
Philip did not know what she meant .
" Why not ? "
" Your mamma 's in heaven . "
She began to cry , and Philip , though he did not quite understand , cried too .
Emma was a tall , big-boned woman , with fair hair and large features .
She came from Devonshire and , notwithstanding her many years of service in London , had never lost the breadth of her accent .
Her tears increased her emotion , and she pressed the little boy to her heart .
She felt vaguely the pity of that child deprived of the only love in the world that is quite unselfish .
It seemed dreadful that he must be handed over to strangers .
But in a little while she pulled herself together .
" Your Uncle William is waiting in to see you , " she said .
" Go and say good-bye to Miss Watkin , and we 'll go home . "
" I do n't want to say good-bye , " he answered , instinctively anxious to hide his tears .
" Very well , run upstairs and get your hat . "
He fetched it , and when he came down Emma was waiting for him in the hall .
He heard the sound of voices in the study behind the dining-room .
He paused .
He knew that Miss Watkin and her sister were talking to friends , and it seemed to him -- he was nine years old -- that if he went in they would be sorry for him .
" I think I 'll go and say good-bye to Miss Watkin . "
" I think you 'd better , " said Emma .
" Go in and tell them I 'm coming , " he said .
He wished to make the most of his opportunity .
Emma knocked at the door and walked in .
He heard her speak .
" Master Philip wants to say good-bye to you , miss . "
There was a sudden hush of the conversation , and Philip limped in .
Henrietta Watkin was a stout woman , with a red face and dyed hair .
In those days to dye the hair excited comment , and Philip had heard much gossip at home when his godmother 's changed colour .
She lived with an elder sister , who had resigned herself contentedly to old age .
Two ladies , whom Philip did not know , were calling , and they looked at him curiously .
" My poor child , " said Miss Watkin , opening her arms .
She began to cry .
Philip understood now why she had not been in to luncheon and why she wore a black dress .
She could not speak .
" I 've got to go home , " said Philip , at last .
He disengaged himself from Miss Watkin 's arms , and she kissed him again .
Then he went to her sister and bade her good-bye too .
One of the strange ladies asked if she might kiss him , and he gravely gave her permission .
Though crying , he keenly enjoyed the sensation he was causing ; he would have been glad to stay a little longer to be made much of , but felt they expected him to go , so he said that Emma was waiting for him .
He went out of the room .
Emma had gone downstairs to speak with a friend in the basement , and he waited for her on the landing .
He heard Henrietta Watkin 's voice .
" His mother was my greatest friend .
I ca n't bear to think that she 's dead . "
" You ought n't to have gone to the funeral , Henrietta , " said her sister .
" I knew it would upset you . "
Then one of the strangers spoke .
" Poor little boy , it 's dreadful to think of him quite alone in the world .
I see he limps . "
" Yes , he 's got a club-foot .
It was such a grief to his mother . "
Then Emma came back .
They called a hansom , and she told the driver where to go .
III When they reached the house Mrs. Carey had died in -- it was in a dreary , respectable street between Notting Hill Gate and High Street , Kensington -- Emma led Philip into the drawing-room .
His uncle was writing letters of thanks for the wreaths which had been sent .
One of them , which had arrived too late for the funeral , lay in its cardboard box on the hall-table .
" Here 's Master Philip , " said Emma .
