Book First I Strether 's first question , when he reached the hotel , was about his friend ; yet on his learning that Waymarsh was apparently not to arrive till evening he was not wholly disconcerted .
A telegram from him bespeaking a room " only if not noisy , " reply paid , was produced for the enquirer at the office , so that the understanding they should meet at Chester rather than at Liverpool remained to that extent sound .
The same secret principle , however , that had prompted Strether not absolutely to desire Waymarsh 's presence at the dock , that had led him thus to postpone for a few hours his enjoyment of it , now operated to make him feel he could still wait without disappointment .
They would dine together at the worst , and , with all respect to dear old Waymarsh -- if not even , for that matter , to himself -- there was little fear that in the sequel they should n't see enough of each other .
The principle I have just mentioned as operating had been , with the most newly disembarked of the two men , wholly instinctive -- the fruit of a sharp sense that , delightful as it would be to find himself looking , after so much separation , into his comrade 's face , his business would be a trifle bungled should he simply arrange for this countenance to present itself to the nearing steamer as the first " note , " of Europe .
Mixed with everything was the apprehension , already , on Strether 's part , that it would , at best , throughout , prove the note of Europe in quite a sufficient degree .
That note had been meanwhile -- since the previous afternoon , thanks to this happier device -- such a consciousness of personal freedom as he had n't known for years ; such a deep taste of change and of having above all for the moment nobody and nothing to consider , as promised already , if headlong hope were not too foolish , to colour his adventure with cool success .
There were people on the ship with whom he had easily consorted -- so far as ease could up to now be imputed to him -- and who for the most part plunged straight into the current that set from the landing-stage to London ; there were others who had invited him to a tryst at the inn and had even invoked his aid for a " look round " at the beauties of Liverpool ; but he had stolen away from every one alike , had kept no appointment and renewed no acquaintance , had been indifferently aware of the number of persons who esteemed themselves fortunate in being , unlike himself , " met , " and had even independently , unsociably , alone , without encounter or relapse and by mere quiet evasion , given his afternoon and evening to the immediate and the sensible .
They formed a qualified draught of Europe , an afternoon and an evening on the banks of the Mersey , but such as it was he took his potion at least undiluted .
He winced a little , truly , at the thought that Waymarsh might be already at Chester ; he reflected that , should he have to describe himself there as having " got in " so early , it would be difficult to make the interval look particularly eager ; but he was like a man who , elatedly finding in his pocket more money than usual , handles it a while and idly and pleasantly chinks it before addressing himself to the business of spending .
That he was prepared to be vague to Waymarsh about the hour of the ship 's touching , and that he both wanted extremely to see him and enjoyed extremely the duration of delay -- these things , it is to be conceived , were early signs in him that his relation to his actual errand might prove none of the simplest .
He was burdened , poor Strether -- it had better be confessed at the outset -- with the oddity of a double consciousness .
There was detachment in his zeal and curiosity in his indifference .
After the young woman in the glass cage had held up to him across her counter the pale-pink leaflet bearing his friend 's name , which she neatly pronounced , he turned away to find himself , in the hall , facing a lady who met his eyes as with an intention suddenly determined , and whose features -- not freshly young , not markedly fine , but on happy terms with each other -- came back to him as from a recent vision .
For a moment they stood confronted ; then the moment placed her : he had noticed her the day before , noticed her at his previous inn , where -- again in the hall -- she had been briefly engaged with some people of his own ship 's company .
Nothing had actually passed between them , and he would as little have been able to say what had been the sign of her face for him on the first occasion as to name the ground of his present recognition .
Recognition at any rate appeared to prevail on her own side as well -- which would only have added to the mystery .
All she now began by saying to him nevertheless was that , having chanced to catch his enquiry , she was moved to ask , by his leave , if it were possibly a question of Mr. Waymarsh of Milrose Connecticut -- Mr. Waymarsh the American lawyer .
" Oh yes , " he replied , " my very well-known friend .
He 's to meet me here , coming up from Malvern , and I supposed he 'd already have arrived .
But he does n't come till later , and I 'm relieved not to have kept him .
Do you know him ? "
Strether wound up .
It was n't till after he had spoken that he became aware of how much there had been in him of response ; when the tone of her own rejoinder , as well as the play of something more in her face -- something more , that is , than its apparently usual restless light -- seemed to notify him .
" I 've met him at Milrose -- where I used sometimes , a good while ago , to stay ; I had friends there who were friends of his , and I 've been at his house .
I wo n't answer for it that he would know me , " Strether 's new acquaintance pursued ; " but I should be delighted to see him .
Perhaps , " she added , " I shall -- for I 'm staying over . "
She paused while our friend took in these things , and it was as if a good deal of talk had already passed .
They even vaguely smiled at it , and Strether presently observed that Mr. Waymarsh would , no doubt , be easily to be seen .
This , however , appeared to affect the lady as if she might have advanced too far .
She appeared to have no reserves about anything .
" Oh , " she said , " he wo n't care ! "
-- and she immediately thereupon remarked that she believed Strether knew the Munsters ; the Munsters being the people he had seen her with at Liverpool .
But he did n't , it happened , know the Munsters well enough to give the case much of a lift ; so that they were left together as if over the mere laid table of conversation .
Her qualification of the mentioned connexion had rather removed than placed a dish , and there seemed nothing else to serve .
Their attitude remained , none the less , that of not forsaking the board ; and the effect of this in turn was to give them the appearance of having accepted each other with an absence of preliminaries practically complete .
They moved along the hall together , and Strether 's companion threw off that the hotel had the advantage of a garden .
He was aware by this time of his strange inconsequence : he had shirked the intimacies of the steamer and had muffled the shock of Waymarsh only to find himself forsaken , in this sudden case , both of avoidance and of caution .
He passed , under this unsought protection and before he had so much as gone up to his room , into the garden of the hotel , and at the end of ten minutes had agreed to meet there again , as soon as he should have made himself tidy , the dispenser of such good assurances .
He wanted to look at the town , and they would forthwith look together .
It was almost as if she had been in possession and received him as a guest .
Her acquaintance with the place presented her in a manner as a hostess , and Strether had a rueful glance for the lady in the glass cage .
It was as if this personage had seen herself instantly superseded .
When in a quarter of an hour he came down , what his hostess saw , what she might have taken in with a vision kindly adjusted , was the lean , the slightly loose figure of a man of the middle height and something more perhaps than the middle age -- a man of five-and-fifty , whose most immediate signs were a marked bloodless brownness of face , a thick dark moustache , of characteristically American cut , growing strong and falling low , a head of hair still abundant but irregularly streaked with grey , and a nose of bold free prominence , the even line , the high finish , as it might have been called , of which , had a certain effect of mitigation .
A perpetual pair of glasses astride of this fine ridge , and a line , unusually deep and drawn , the prolonged pen-stroke of time , accompanying the curve of the moustache from nostril to chin , did something to complete the facial furniture that an attentive observer would have seen catalogued , on the spot , in the vision of the other party to Strether 's appointment .
She waited for him in the garden , the other party , drawing on a pair of singularly fresh soft and elastic light gloves and presenting herself with a superficial readiness which , as he approached her over the small smooth lawn and in the watery English sunshine , he might , with his rougher preparation , have marked as the model for such an occasion .
She had , this lady , a perfect plain propriety , an expensive subdued suitability , that her companion was not free to analyse , but that struck him , so that his consciousness of it was instantly acute , as a quality quite new to him .
Before reaching her he stopped on the grass and went through the form of feeling for something , possibly forgotten , in the light overcoat he carried on his arm ; yet the essence of the act was no more than the impulse to gain time .
Nothing could have been odder than Strether 's sense of himself as at that moment launched in something of which the sense would be quite disconnected from the sense of his past and which was literally beginning there and then .
It had begun in fact already upstairs and before the dressing glass that struck him as blocking further , so strangely , the dimness of the window of his dull bedroom ; begun with a sharper survey of the elements of Appearance than he had for a long time been moved to make .
He had during those moments felt these elements to be not so much to his hand as he should have liked , and then had fallen back on the thought that they were precisely a matter as to which help was supposed to come from what he was about to do .
He was about to go up to London , so that hat and necktie might wait .
What had come as straight to him as a ball in a well-played game -- and caught moreover not less neatly -- was just the air , in the person of his friend , of having seen and chosen , the air of achieved possession of those vague qualities and quantities that collectively figured to him as the advantage snatched from lucky chances .
Without pomp or circumstance , certainly , as her original address to him , equally with his own response , had been , he would have sketched to himself his impression of her as : " Well , she 's more thoroughly civilized -- ! "
If " More thoroughly than WHOM ? "
would not have been for him a sequel to this remark , that was just by reason of his deep consciousness of the bearing of his comparison .
