PART I .
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT .
CHAPTER I .
The author gives some account of himself and family .
His first inducements to travel .
He is shipwrecked , and swims for his life .
Gets safe on shore in the country of Lilliput ; is made a prisoner , and carried up the country .
My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire : I was the third of five sons .
He sent me to Emanuel College in Cambridge at fourteen years old , where I resided three years , and applied myself close to my studies ; but the charge of maintaining me , although I had a very scanty allowance , being too great for a narrow fortune , I was bound apprentice to Mr. James Bates , an eminent surgeon in London , with whom I continued four years .
My father now and then sending me small sums of money , I laid them out in learning navigation , and other parts of the mathematics , useful to those who intend to travel , as I always believed it would be , some time or other , my fortune to do .
When I left Mr. Bates , I went down to my father : where , by the assistance of him and my uncle John , and some other relations , I got forty pounds , and a promise of thirty pounds a year to maintain me at Leyden : there I studied physic two years and seven months , knowing it would be useful in long voyages .
Soon after my return from Leyden , I was recommended by my good master , Mr. Bates , to be surgeon to the Swallow , Captain Abraham Pannel , commander ; with whom I continued three years and a half , making a voyage or two into the Levant , and some other parts .
When I came back I resolved to settle in London ; to which Mr. Bates , my master , encouraged me , and by him I was recommended to several patients .
I took part of a small house in the Old Jewry ; and being advised to alter my condition , I married Mrs. Mary Burton , second daughter to Mr. Edmund Burton , hosier , in Newgate-street , with whom I received four hundred pounds for a portion .
But my good master Bates dying in two years after , and I having few friends , my business began to fail ; for my conscience would not suffer me to imitate the bad practice of too many among my brethren .
Having therefore consulted with my wife , and some of my acquaintance , I determined to go again to sea .
I was surgeon successively in two ships , and made several voyages , for six years , to the East and West Indies , by which I got some addition to my fortune .
My hours of leisure I spent in reading the best authors , ancient and modern , being always provided with a good number of books ; and when I was ashore , in observing the manners and dispositions of the people , as well as learning their language ; wherein I had a great facility , by the strength of my memory .
The last of these voyages not proving very fortunate , I grew weary of the sea , and intended to stay at home with my wife and family .
I removed from the Old Jewry to Fetter Lane , and from thence to Wapping , hoping to get business among the sailors ; but it would not turn to account .
After three years expectation that things would mend , I accepted an advantageous offer from Captain William Prichard , master of the Antelope , who was making a voyage to the South Sea .
We set sail from Bristol , May 4 , 1699 , and our voyage was at first very prosperous .
It would not be proper , for some reasons , to trouble the reader with the particulars of our adventures in those seas ; let it suffice to inform him , that in our passage from thence to the East Indies , we were driven by a violent storm to the north-west of Van Diemen ’s Land .
By an observation , we found ourselves in the latitude of 30 degrees 2 minutes south .
Twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate labour and ill food ; the rest were in a very weak condition .
On the 5th of November , which was the beginning of summer in those parts , the weather being very hazy , the seamen spied a rock within half a cable ’s length of the ship ; but the wind was so strong , that we were driven directly upon it , and immediately split .
Six of the crew , of whom I was one , having let down the boat into the sea , made a shift to get clear of the ship and the rock .
We rowed , by my computation , about three leagues , till we were able to work no longer , being already spent with labour while we were in the ship .
We therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves , and in about half an hour the boat was overset by a sudden flurry from the north .
What became of my companions in the boat , as well as of those who escaped on the rock , or were left in the vessel , I can not tell ; but conclude they were all lost .
For my own part , I swam as fortune directed me , and was pushed forward by wind and tide .
I often let my legs drop , and could feel no bottom ; but when I was almost gone , and able to struggle no longer , I found myself within my depth ; and by this time the storm was much abated .
The declivity was so small , that I walked near a mile before I got to the shore , which I conjectured was about eight o’clock in the evening .
I then advanced forward near half a mile , but could not discover any sign of houses or inhabitants ; at least I was in so weak a condition , that I did not observe them .
I was extremely tired , and with that , and the heat of the weather , and about half a pint of brandy that I drank as I left the ship , I found myself much inclined to sleep .
I lay down on the grass , which was very short and soft , where I slept sounder than ever I remembered to have done in my life , and , as I reckoned , about nine hours ; for when I awaked , it was just day-light .
I attempted to rise , but was not able to stir : for , as I happened to lie on my back , I found my arms and legs were strongly fastened on each side to the ground ; and my hair , which was long and thick , tied down in the same manner .
I likewise felt several slender ligatures across my body , from my arm-pits to my thighs .
I could only look upwards ; the sun began to grow hot , and the light offended my eyes .
I heard a confused noise about me ; but in the posture I lay , could see nothing except the sky .
In a little time I felt something alive moving on my left leg , which advancing gently forward over my breast , came almost up to my chin ; when , bending my eyes downwards as much as I could , I perceived it to be a human creature not six inches high , with a bow and arrow in his hands , and a quiver at his back .
In the mean time , I felt at least forty more of the same kind ( as I conjectured ) following the first .
I was in the utmost astonishment , and roared so loud , that they all ran back in a fright ; and some of them , as I was afterwards told , were hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground .
However , they soon returned , and one of them , who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face , lifting up his hands and eyes by way of admiration , cried out in a shrill but distinct voice , _ Hekinah degul _ : the others repeated the same words several times , but then I knew not what they meant .
I lay all this while , as the reader may believe , in great uneasiness .
At length , struggling to get loose , I had the fortune to break the strings , and wrench out the pegs that fastened my left arm to the ground ; for , by lifting it up to my face , I discovered the methods they had taken to bind me , and at the same time with a violent pull , which gave me excessive pain , I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair on the left side , so that I was just able to turn my head about two inches .
But the creatures ran off a second time , before I could seize them ; whereupon there was a great shout in a very shrill accent , and after it ceased I heard one of them cry aloud _ Tolgo phonac _ ; when in an instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged on my left hand , which , pricked me like so many needles ; and besides , they shot another flight into the air , as we do bombs in Europe , whereof many , I suppose , fell on my body , ( though I felt them not ) , and some on my face , which I immediately covered with my left hand .
When this shower of arrows was over , I fell a groaning with grief and pain ; and then striving again to get loose , they discharged another volley larger than the first , and some of them attempted with spears to stick me in the sides ; but by good luck I had on a buff jerkin , which they could not pierce .
I thought it the most prudent method to lie still , and my design was to continue so till night , when , my left hand being already loose , I could easily free myself : and as for the inhabitants , I had reason to believe I might be a match for the greatest army they could bring against me , if they were all of the same size with him that I saw .
But fortune disposed otherwise of me .
When the people observed I was quiet , they discharged no more arrows ; but , by the noise I heard , I knew their numbers increased ; and about four yards from me , over against my right ear , I heard a knocking for above an hour , like that of people at work ; when turning my head that way , as well as the pegs and strings would permit me , I saw a stage erected about a foot and a half from the ground , capable of holding four of the inhabitants , with two or three ladders to mount it : from whence one of them , who seemed to be a person of quality , made me a long speech , whereof I understood not one syllable .
But I should have mentioned , that before the principal person began his oration , he cried out three times , _ Langro dehul san _ ( these words and the former were afterwards repeated and explained to me ) ; whereupon , immediately , about fifty of the inhabitants came and cut the strings that fastened the left side of my head , which gave me the liberty of turning it to the right , and of observing the person and gesture of him that was to speak .
He appeared to be of a middle age , and taller than any of the other three who attended him , whereof one was a page that held up his train , and seemed to be somewhat longer than my middle finger ; the other two stood one on each side to support him .
He acted every part of an orator , and I could observe many periods of threatenings , and others of promises , pity , and kindness .
I answered in a few words , but in the most submissive manner , lifting up my left hand , and both my eyes to the sun , as calling him for a witness ; and being almost famished with hunger , having not eaten a morsel for some hours before I left the ship , I found the demands of nature so strong upon me , that I could not forbear showing my impatience ( perhaps against the strict rules of decency ) by putting my finger frequently to my mouth , to signify that I wanted food .
The _ hurgo _ ( for so they call a great lord , as I afterwards learnt ) understood me very well .
He descended from the stage , and commanded that several ladders should be applied to my sides , on which above a hundred of the inhabitants mounted and walked towards my mouth , laden with baskets full of meat , which had been provided and sent thither by the king ’s orders , upon the first intelligence he received of me .
I observed there was the flesh of several animals , but could not distinguish them by the taste .
There were shoulders , legs , and loins , shaped like those of mutton , and very well dressed , but smaller than the wings of a lark .
I ate them by two or three at a mouthful , and took three loaves at a time , about the bigness of musket bullets .
They supplied me as fast as they could , showing a thousand marks of wonder and astonishment at my bulk and appetite .
I then made another sign , that I wanted drink .
They found by my eating that a small quantity would not suffice me ; and being a most ingenious people , they slung up , with great dexterity , one of their largest hogsheads , then rolled it towards my hand , and beat out the top ; I drank it off at a draught , which I might well do , for it did not hold half a pint , and tasted like a small wine of Burgundy , but much more delicious .
They brought me a second hogshead , which I drank in the same manner , and made signs for more ; but they had none to give me .
When I had performed these wonders , they shouted for joy , and danced upon my breast , repeating several times as they did at first , _ Hekinah degul _ .
They made me a sign that I should throw down the two hogsheads , but first warning the people below to stand out of the way , crying aloud , _ Borach mevolah _ ; and when they saw the vessels in the air , there was a universal shout of _ Hekinah degul _ .
I confess I was often tempted , while they were passing backwards and forwards on my body , to seize forty or fifty of the first that came in my reach , and dash them against the ground .
But the remembrance of what I had felt , which probably might not be the worst they could do , and the promise of honour I made them — for so I interpreted my submissive behaviour — soon drove out these imaginations .
Besides , I now considered myself as bound by the laws of hospitality , to a people who had treated me with so much expense and magnificence .
However , in my thoughts I could not sufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of these diminutive mortals , who durst venture to mount and walk upon my body , while one of my hands was at liberty , without trembling at the very sight of so prodigious a creature as I must appear to them .
After some time , when they observed that I made no more demands for meat , there appeared before me a person of high rank from his imperial majesty .
His excellency , having mounted on the small of my right leg , advanced forwards up to my face , with about a dozen of his retinue ; and producing his credentials under the signet royal , which he applied close to my eyes , spoke about ten minutes without any signs of anger , but with a kind of determinate resolution , often pointing forwards , which , as I afterwards found , was towards the capital city , about half a mile distant ; whither it was agreed by his majesty in council that I must be conveyed .
I answered in few words , but to no purpose , and made a sign with my hand that was loose , putting it to the other ( but over his excellency ’s head for fear of hurting him or his train ) and then to my own head and body , to signify that I desired my liberty .
It appeared that he understood me well enough , for he shook his head by way of disapprobation , and held his hand in a posture to show that I must be carried as a prisoner .
However , he made other signs to let me understand that I should have meat and drink enough , and very good treatment .
Whereupon I once more thought of attempting to break my bonds ; but again , when I felt the smart of their arrows upon my face and hands , which were all in blisters , and many of the darts still sticking in them , and observing likewise that the number of my enemies increased , I gave tokens to let them know that they might do with me what they pleased .
Upon this , the _ hurgo _ and his train withdrew , with much civility and cheerful countenances .
Soon after I heard a general shout , with frequent repetitions of the words _ Peplom selan _ ; and I felt great numbers of people on my left side relaxing the cords to such a degree , that I was able to turn upon my right , and to ease myself with making water ; which I very plentifully did , to the great astonishment of the people ; who , conjecturing by my motion what I was going to do , immediately opened to the right and left on that side , to avoid the torrent , which fell with such noise and violence from me .
But before this , they had daubed my face and both my hands with a sort of ointment , very pleasant to the smell , which , in a few minutes , removed all the smart of their arrows .
These circumstances , added to the refreshment I had received by their victuals and drink , which were very nourishing , disposed me to sleep .
I slept about eight hours , as I was afterwards assured ; and it was no wonder , for the physicians , by the emperor ’s order , had mingled a sleepy potion in the hogsheads of wine .
