During the whole of a dull , dark , and soundless day in the autumn of the year , when the clouds hung oppressively low in the heavens , I had been passing alone , on horseback , through a singularly dreary tract of country ; and at length found myself , as the shades of the evening drew on , within view of the melancholy House of Usher .
I know not how it was -- but , with the first glimpse of the building , a sense of insufferable gloom pervaded my spirit .
I say insufferable ; for the feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-pleasureable , because poetic , sentiment , with which the mind usually receives even the sternest natural images of the desolate or terrible .
I looked upon the scene before me -- upon the mere house , and the simple landscape features of the domain -- upon the bleak walls -- upon the vacant eye-like windows -- upon a few rank sedges -- and upon a few white trunks of decayed trees -- with an utter depression of soul which I can compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to the after-dream of the reveller upon opium -- the bitter lapse into everyday life -- the hideous dropping off of the veil .
There was an iciness , a sinking , a sickening of the heart -- an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no goading of the imagination could torture into aught of the sublime .
What was it -- I paused to think -- what was it that so unnerved me in the contemplation of the House of Usher ?
It was a mystery all insoluble ; nor could I grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as I pondered .
I was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion , that while , beyond doubt , there are combinations of very simple natural objects which have the power of thus affecting us , still the analysis of this power lies among considerations beyond our depth .
It was possible , I reflected , that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the scene , of the details of the picture , would be sufficient to modify , or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful impression ; and , acting upon this idea , I reined my horse to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in unruffled lustre by the dwelling , and gazed down -- but with a shudder even more thrilling than before -- upon the remodelled and inverted images of the grey sedge , and the ghastly tree-stems , and the vacant and eye-like windows .
Nevertheless , in this mansion of gloom I now proposed to myself a sojourn of some weeks .
Its proprietor , Roderick Usher , had been one of my boon companions in boyhood ; but many years had elapsed since our last meeting .
A letter , however , had lately reached me in a distant part of the country -- a letter from him -- which , in its wildly importunate nature , had admitted of no other than a personal reply .
The MS gave evidence of nervous agitation .
The writer spoke of acute bodily illness -- of a mental disorder which oppressed him -- and of an earnest desire to see me , as his best , and indeed his only personal friend , with a view of attempting , by the cheerfulness of my society , some alleviation of his malady .
It was the manner in which all this , and much more , was said -- it was the apparent heart that went with his request -- which allowed me no room for hesitation ; and I accordingly obeyed forthwith what I still considered a very singular summons .
Although , as boys , we had been even intimate associates , yet I really knew little of my friend .
His reserve had been always excessive and habitual .
I was aware , however , that his very ancient family had been noted , time out of mind , for a peculiar sensibility of temperament , displaying itself , through long ages , in many works of exalted art , and manifested , of late , in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity , as well as in a passionate devotion to the intricacies , perhaps even more than to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties of musical science .
I had learned , too , the very remarkable fact , that the stem of the Usher race , all time-honoured as it was , had put forth , at no period , any enduring branch ; in other words , that the entire family lay in the direct line of descent , and had always , with very trifling and very temporary variation , so lain .
It was this deficiency , I considered , while running over in thought the perfect keeping of the character of the premises with the accredited character of the people , and while speculating upon the possible influence which the one , in the long lapse of centuries , might have exercised upon the other -- it was this deficiency , perhaps , of collateral issue , and the consequent undeviating transmission , from sire to son , of the patrimony with the name , which had , at length , so identified the two as to merge the original title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal appellation of the " House of Usher " -- an appellation which seemed to include , in the minds of the peasantry who used it , both the family and the family mansion .
I have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish experiment -- that of looking down within the tarn -- had been to deepen the first singular impression .
There can be no doubt that the consciousness of the rapid increase of my superstition -- for why should I not so term it ?
-- served mainly to accelerate the increase itself .
Such , I have long known , is the paradoxical law of all sentiments having terror as a basis .
And it might have been for this reason only , that , when I again uplifted my eyes to the house itself , from its image in the pool , there grew in my mind a strange fancy -- a fancy so ridiculous , indeed , that I but mention it to show the vivid force of the sensations which oppressed me .
I had so worked upon my imagination as really to believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an atmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity -- an atmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven , but which had reeked up from the decayed trees , and the grey wall , and the silent tarn -- a pestilent and mystic vapour , dull , sluggish , faintly discernible , and leaden-hued .
Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream , I scanned more narrowly the real aspect of the building .
Its principal feature seemed to be that of an excessive antiquity .
The discoloration of ages had been great .
Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior , hanging in a fine tangled web-work from the eaves .
Yet all this was apart from any extraordinary dilapidation .
No portion of the masonry had fallen ; and there appeared to be a wild inconsistency between its still perfect adaptation of parts , and the crumbling condition of the individual stones .
In this there was much that reminded me of the specious totality of old wood-work which has rotted for long years in some neglected vault , with no disturbance from the breath of the external air .
Beyond this indication of extensive decay , however , the fabric gave little token of instability .
Perhaps the eye of a scrutinizing observer might have discovered a barely perceptible fissure , which , extending from the roof of the building in front , made its way down the wall in a zigzag direction , until it became lost in the sullen waters of the tarn .
Noticing these things , I rode over a short causeway to the house .
A servant in waiting took my horse , and I entered the Gothic archway of the hall .
A valet , of stealthy step , thence conducted me , in silence , through many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio of his master .
Much that I encountered on the way contributed , I know not how , to heighten the vague sentiments of which I have already spoken .
While the objects around me -- while the carvings of the ceilings , the sombre tapestries of the walls , the ebon blackness of the floors , and the phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as I strode , were but matters to which , or to such as which , I had been accustomed from my infancy -- while I hesitated not to acknowledge how familiar was all this -- I still wondered to find how unfamiliar were the fancies which ordinary images were stirring up .
On one of the staircases , I met the physician of the family .
His countenance , I thought , wore a mingled expression of low cunning and perplexity .
He accosted me with trepidation and passed on .
The valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the presence of his master .
The room in which I found myself was very large and lofty .
The windows were long , narrow , and pointed , and at so vast a distance from the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible from within .
Feeble gleams of encrimsoned light made their way through the trellised panes , and served to render sufficiently distinct the more prominent objects around ; the eye , however , struggled in vain to reach the remoter angles of the chamber , or the recesses of the vaulted and fretted ceiling .
Dark draperies hung upon the walls .
The general furniture was profuse , comfortless , antique , and tattered .
Many books and musical instruments lay scattered about , but failed to give any vitality to the scene .
I felt that I breathed an atmosphere of sorrow .
An air of stern , deep , and irredeemable gloom hung over and pervaded all .
Upon my entrance , Usher rose from a sofa on which he had been lying at full length , and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much in it , I at first thought , of an overdone cordiality -- of the constrained effort of the ennuye man of the world .
A glance , however , at his countenance , convinced me of his perfect sincerity .
We sat down ; and for some moments , while he spoke not , I gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity , half of awe .
Surely , man had never before so terribly altered , in so brief a period , as had Roderick Usher !
It was with difficulty that I could bring myself to admit the identity of the wan being before me with the companion of my early boyhood .
Yet the character of his face had been at all times remarkable .
A cadaverousness of complexion ; an eye large , liquid , and luminous beyond comparison ; lips somewhat thin and very pallid , but of a surpassingly beautiful curve ; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model , but with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations ; a finely-moulded chin , speaking , in its want of prominence , of a want of moral energy ; hair of a more than web-like softness and tenuity ; these features , with an inordinate expansion above the regions of the temple , made up altogether a countenance not easily to be forgotten .
And now in the mere exaggeration of the prevailing character of these features , and of the expression they were wont to convey , lay so much of change that I doubted to whom I spoke .
The now ghastly pallor of the skin , and the now miraculous lustre of the eye , above all things startled and even awed me .
The silken hair , too , had been suffered to grow all unheeded , and as , in its wild gossamer texture , it floated rather than fell about the face , I could not , even with effort , connect its Arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity .
