I MAKING GOOD WITH MOTHER When men began to build cities vertically instead of horizontally there passed from our highways a picturesque figure , and from our language an expressive figure of speech .
That oily-tongued , persuasive , soft-stepping stranger in the rusty Prince Albert and the black string tie who had been wont to haunt our back steps and front offices with his carefully wrapped bundle , retreated in bewildered defeat before the clanging blows of steel on steel that meant the erection of the first twenty-story skyscraper .
" As slick , " we used to say , " as a lightning-rod agent . "
Of what use his wares on a building whose tower was robed in clouds and which used the chain lightning for a necklace ?
The Fourth Avenue antique dealer had another curio to add to his collection of andirons , knockers , snuff boxes and warming pans .
But even as this quaint figure vanished there sprang up a new and glittering one to take his place .
He stood framed in the great plate-glass window of the very building which had brought about the defeat of his predecessor .
A miracle of close shaving his face was , and a marvel of immaculateness his linen .
Dapper he was , and dressy , albeit inclined to glittering effects and a certain plethory at the back of the neck .
Back of him stood shining shapes that reflected his glory in enamel , and brass , and glass .
His language was floral , but choice ; his talk was of gearings and bearings and cylinders and magnetos ; his method differed from that of him who went before as the method of a skilled aëronaut differs from that of the man who goes over Niagara in a barrel .
And as he multiplied and spread over the land we coined a new figure of speech .
" Smooth ! " we chuckled .
" As smooth as an automobile salesman . "
But even as we listened , fascinated by his fluent verbiage there grew within us a certain resentment .
Familiarity with his glittering wares bred a contempt of them , so that he fell to speaking of them as necessities instead of luxuries .
He juggled figures , and thought nothing of four of them in a row .
We looked at our five-thousand-dollar salary , so strangely shrunken and thin now , and even as we looked we saw that the method of the unctuous , anxious stranger had become antiquated in its turn .
Then from his ashes emerged a new being .
Neither urger nor spellbinder he .
The twentieth century was stamped across his brow , and on his lips was ever the word " Service . "
Silent , courteous , watchful , alert , he listened , while you talked .
His method , in turn , made that of the silk-lined salesman sound like the hoarse hoots of the ballyhoo man at a county fair .
Blithely he accepted five hundred thousand dollars and gave in return -- a promise .
And when we would search our soul for a synonym to express all that was low-voiced , and suave , and judicious , and patient , and sure , we began to say , " As alert as an advertising expert . "
Jock McChesney , looking as fresh and clear-eyed as only twenty-one and a cold shower can make one look , stood in the doorway of his mother 's bedroom .
His toilette had halted abruptly at the bathrobe stage .
One of those bulky garments swathed his slim figure , while over his left arm hung a gray tweed Norfolk coat .
From his right hand dangled a pair of trousers , in pattern a modish black-and-white .
Jock regarded the gray garment on his arm with moody eyes .
" Well , I 'd like to know what 's the matter with it ! " he demanded , a trifle irritably .
Emma McChesney , in the act of surveying her back hair in the mirror , paused , hand glass poised half way , to regard her son .
" All right , " she answered cheerfully .
" I 'll tell you .
It 's too young . "
" Young ! "
He held it at arm 's length and stared at it .
" What d'you mean -- young ? "
Emma McChesney came forward , wrapping the folds of her kimono about her .
She took the disputed garment in one hand and held it aloft .
" I know that you look like a man on a magazine cover in it .
But Norfolk suits spell tennis , and seashore , and elegant leisure .
And you 're going out this morning , Son , to interview business men .
You 're going to try to impress the advertising world with the fact that it needs your expert services .
You walk into a business office in a Norfolk suit , and everybody from the office boy to the president of the company will ask you what your score is . "
She tossed it back over his arm .
" I 'll wear the black and white , " said Jock resignedly , and turned toward his own room .
At his doorway he paused and raised his voice slightly : " For that matter , they 're looking for young men .
Everybody 's young .
Why , the biggest men in the advertising game are just kids . "
He disappeared within his room , still talking .
" Look at McQuirk , advertising manager of the Combs Car Company .
He 's so young he has to disguise himself in bone-trimmed eye-glasses with a black ribbon to get away with it .
Look at Hopper , of the Berg , Shriner Company .
Pulls down ninety thousand a year , and if he 's thirty-five I 'll -- " " Well , you asked my advice , " interrupted his mother 's voice with that muffled effect which is caused by a skirt being slipped over the head , " and I gave it .
Wear a white duck sailor suit with blue anchors and carry a red tin pail and a shovel , if you want to look young .
Only get into it in a jiffy , Son , because breakfast will be ready in ten minutes .
I can tell by the way Annie 's crashing the cups .
So step lively if you want to pay your lovely mother 's subway fare . "
Ten minutes later the slim young figure , in its English-fitting black and white , sat opposite Emma McChesney at the breakfast table and between excited gulps of coffee outlined a meteoric career in his chosen field .
And the more he talked and the rosier his figures of speech became , the more silent and thoughtful fell his mother .
She wondered if five o'clock would find a droop to the set of those young shoulders ; if the springy young legs in their absurdly scant modish trousers would have lost some of their elasticity ; if the buoyant step in the flat-heeled shoes would not drag a little .
Thirteen years of business experience had taught her to swallow smilingly the bitter pill of rebuff .
But this boy was to experience his first dose to-day .
She felt again that sensation of almost physical nausea -- that sickness of heart and spirit which had come over her when she had met her first sneer and intolerant shrug .
It had been her maiden trip on the road for the T.A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company .
She was secretary of that company now , and moving spirit in its policy .
But the wound of that first insult still ached .
A word from her would have placed the boy and saved him from curt refusals .
She withheld that word .
He must fight his fight alone .
" I want to write the kind of ad , " Jock was saying excitedly , " that you see 'em staring at in the subways , and street cars and L-trains .
I want to sit across the aisle and watch their up-turned faces staring at that oblong , and reading it aloud to each other . "
" Is n't that an awfully obvious necktie you 're wearing , Jock ? " inquired his mother irrelevantly .
" This ?
You ought to see some of them .
This is a Quaker stock in comparison . "
He glanced down complacently at the vivid-hued silken scarf that the season 's mode demanded .
Immediately he was off again .
" And the first thing you know , Mrs. McChesney , ma'am , we 'll have a motor truck backing up at the door once a month and six strong men carrying my salary to the freight elevator in sacks . "
Emma McChesney buttered her bit of toast , then looked up to remark quietly : " Had n't you better qualify for the trial heats , Jock , before you jump into the finals ? "
" Trial heats ! " sneered Jock .
" They 're poky .
I want real money .
Now !
It is n't enough to be just well-to-do in these days .
It needs money .
I want to be rich !
Not just prosperous , but rich !
So rich that I can let the bath soap float around in the water without any pricks of conscience .
So successful that they 'll say , ' And he 's a mere boy , too .
Imagine ! ' "
And , " Jock dear , " Emma McChesney said , " you 've still to learn that plans and ambitions are like soap bubbles .
The harder you blow and the more you inflate them , the quicker they burst .
Plans and ambitions are things to be kept locked away in your heart , Son , with no one but yourself to take an occasional peep at them . "
Jock leaned over the table , with his charming smile .
" You 're a jealous blonde , " he laughed .
" Because I 'm going to be a captain of finance -- an advertising wizard ; you 're afraid I 'll grab the glory all away from you . "
[ Illustration : " ' You 're a jealous blond , ' he said " ] Mrs. McChesney folded her napkin and rose .
She looked unbelievably young , and trim , and radiant , to be the mother of this boasting boy .
" I 'm not afraid , " she drawled , a wicked little glint in her blue eyes .
" You see , they 'll only regard your feats and say , ' H 'm , no wonder .
He ought to be able to sell ice to an Eskimo .
His mother was Emma McChesney . ' "
And then , being a modern mother , she donned smart autumn hat and tailored suit coat and stood ready to reach her office by nine-thirty .
But because she was as motherly as she was modern she swung open the door between kitchen and dining-room to advise with Annie , the adept .
" Lamb chops to-night , eh , Annie ?
And sweet potatoes .
Jock loves 'em .
And corn au gratin and some head lettuce . "
She glanced toward Jock in the hallway , then lowered her voice .
" Annie , " she teased , " just give us one of your peach cobblers , will you ?
You see he -- he 's going to be awfully -- tired when he gets home . "
