CHAPTER I THE SLAVE 'S SOCIAL CIRCLE .
With the growing population in the Southern States , the increase of mulattoes has been very great .
Society does not frown upon the man who sits with his half-white child upon his knee whilst the mother stands , a slave , behind his chair .
In nearly all the cities and towns of the Slave States , the real negro , or clear black , does not amount to more than one in four of the slave population .
This fact is of itself the best evidence of the degraded and immoral condition of the relation of master and slave .
Throughout the Southern States , there is a class of slaves who , in most of the towns , are permitted to hire their time from their owners , and who are always expected to pay a high price .
This class is the mulatto women , distinguished for their fascinating beauty .
The handsomest of these usually pay the greatest amount for their time .
Many of these women are the favorites of men of property and standing , who furnish them with the means of compensating their owners , and not a few are dressed in the most extravagant manner .
When we take into consideration the fact that no safeguard is thrown around virtue , and no inducement held out to slave-women to be pure and chaste , we will not be surprised when told that immorality and vice pervade the cities and towns of the South to an extent unknown in the Northern States .
Indeed , many of the slave-women have no higher aspiration than that of becoming the finely-dressed mistress of some white man .
At negro balls and parties , this class of women usually make the most splendid appearance , and are eagerly sought after in the dance , or to entertain in the drawing-room or at the table .
A few years ago , among the many slave-women in Richmond , Virginia , who hired their time of their masters , was Agnes , a mulatto owned by John Graves , Esq. , and who might be heard boasting that she was the daughter of an American Senator .
Although nearly forty years of age at the time of which we write , Agnes was still exceedingly handsome .
More than half white , with long black hair and deep blue eyes , no one felt like disputing with her when she urged her claim to her relationship with the Anglo-Saxon .
In her younger days , Agnes had been a housekeeper for a young slaveholder , and in sustaining this relation had become the mother of two daughters .
After being cast aside by this young man , the slave-woman betook herself to the business of a laundress , and was considered to be the most tasteful woman in Richmond at her vocation .
Isabella and Marion , the two daughters of Agnes , resided with their mother , and gave her what aid they could in her business .
The mother , however , was very choice of her daughters , and would allow them to perform no labor that would militate against their lady-like appearance .
Agnes early resolved to bring up her daughters as ladies , as she termed it .
As the girls grew older , the mother had to pay a stipulated price for them per month .
Her notoriety as a laundress of the first class enabled her to put an extra charge upon the linen that passed through her hands ; and although she imposed little or no work upon her daughters , she was enabled to live in comparative luxury and have her daughters dressed to attract attention , especially at the negro balls and parties .
Although the term " negro ball " is applied to these gatherings , yet a large portion of the men who attend them are whites .
Negro balls and parties in the Southern States , especially in the cities and towns , are usually made up of quadroon women , a few negro men , and any number of white gentlemen .
These are gatherings of the most democratic character .
Bankers , merchants , lawyers , doctors , and their clerks and students , all take part in these social assemblies upon terms of perfect equality .
The father and son not unfrequently meet and dance alike at a negro ball .
It was at one of these parties that Henry Linwood , the son of a wealthy and retired gentleman of Richmond , was first introduced to Isabella , the oldest daughter of Agnes .
The young man had just returned from Harvard College , where he had spent the previous five years .
Isabella was in her eighteenth year , and was admitted by all who knew her to be the handsomest girl , colored or white , in the city .
On this occasion , she was attired in a sky-blue silk dress , with deep black lace flounces , and bertha of the same .
On her well-moulded arms she wore massive gold bracelets , while her rich black hair was arranged at the back in broad basket plaits , ornamented with pearls , and the front in the French style ( a la Imperatrice ) , which suited her classic face to perfection .
Marion was scarcely less richly dressed than her sister .
Henry Linwood paid great attention to Isabella which was looked upon with gratification by her mother , and became a matter of general conversation with all present .
Of course , the young man escorted the beautiful quadroon home that evening , and became the favorite visitor at the house of Agnes .
It was on a beautiful moonlight night in the month of August when all who reside in tropical climates are eagerly grasping for a breath of fresh air , that Henry Linwood was in the garden which surrounded Agnes ' cottage , with the young quadroon by his side .
He drew from his pocket a newspaper wet from the press , and read the following advertisement : -- NOTICE .
-- Seventy-nine negroes will be offered for sale on Monday , September 10 , at 12 o'clock , being the entire stock of the late John Graves in an excellent condition , and all warranted against the common vices .
Among them are several mechanics , able-bodied field-hands , plough-boys , and women with children , some of them very prolific , affording a rare opportunity for any one who wishes to raise a strong and healthy lot of servants for their own use .
Also several mulatto girls of rare personal qualities , -- two of these very superior .
Among the above slaves advertised for sale were Agnes and her two daughters .
Ere young Linwood left the quadroon that evening , he promised her that he would become her purchaser , and make her free and her own mistress .
Mr. Graves had long been considered not only an excellent and upright citizen of the first standing among the whites , but even the slaves regarded him as one of the kindest of masters .
Having inherited his slaves with the rest of his property , he became possessed of them without any consultation or wish of his own .
He would neither buy nor sell slaves , and was exceedingly careful , in letting them out , that they did not find oppressive and tyrannical masters .
No slave speculator ever dared to cross the threshold of this planter of the Old Dominion .
He was a constant attendant upon religious worship , and was noted for his general benevolence .
The American Bible Society , the American Tract Society , and the cause of Foreign Missions , found in him a liberal friend .
He was always anxious that his slaves should appear well on the Sabbath , and have an opportunity of hearing the word of God .
CHAPTER II THE NEGRO SALE .
As might have been expected , the day of sale brought an usually large number together to compete for the property to be sold .
Farmers , who make a business of raising slaves for the market , were there , and slave-traders , who make a business of buying human beings in the slave-raising States and taking them to the far South , were also in attendance .
Men and women , too , who wished to purchase for their own use , had found their way to the slave sale .
In the midst of the throne was one who felt a deeper interest in the result of the sale than any other of the bystanders .
This was young Linwood .
True to his promise , he was there with a blank bank-check in his pocket , awaiting with impatience to enter the list as a bidder for the beautiful slave .
It was indeed a heart-rending scene to witness the lamentations of these slaves , all of whom had grown up together on the old homestead of Mr. Graves , and who had been treated with great kindness by that gentleman , during his life .
Now they were to be separated , and form new relations and companions .
Such is the precarious condition of the slave .
Even when with a good master , there is no certainty of his happiness in the future .
The less valuable slaves were first placed upon the auction-block , one after another , and sold to the highest bidder .
Husbands and wives were separated with a degree of indifference that is unknown in any other relation in life .
Brothers and sisters were tom from each other , and mothers saw their children for the last time on earth .
It was late in the day , and when the greatest number of persons were thought to be present , when Agnes and her daughters were brought out to the place of sale .
The mother was first put upon the auction-block , and sold to a noted negro trader named Jennings .
Marion was next ordered to ascend the stand , which she did with a trembling step , and was sold for $ 1200 .
All eyes were now turned on Isabella , as she was led forward by the auctioneer .
The appearance of the handsome quadroon caused a deep sensation among the crowd .
There she stood , with a skin as fair as most white women , her features as beautifully regular as any of her sex of pure Anglo-Saxon blood , her long black hair done up in the neatest manner , her form tall and graceful , and her whole appearance indicating one superior to her condition .
The auctioneer commenced by saying that Miss Isabella was fit to deck the drawing-room of the finest mansion in Virginia .
" How much , gentlemen , for this real Albino !
-- fit fancy-girl for any one !
She enjoys good health , and has a sweet temper .
How much do you say ? "
" Five hundred dollars . "
" Only five hundred for such a girl as this ?
Gentlemen , she is worth a deal more than that sum .
You certainly do not know the value of the article you are bidding on .
Here , gentlemen , I hold in my hand a paper certifying that she has a good moral character . "
" Seven hundred . "
" Ah , gentlemen , that is something like .
This paper also states that she is very intelligent . "
" Eight hundred . "
" She was first sprinkled , then immersed , and is now warranted to be a devoted Christian , and perfectly trustworthy . "
