CHAPTER ONE PLAYING PILGRIMS " Christmas wo n't be Christmas without any presents , " grumbled Jo , lying on the rug .
" It 's so dreadful to be poor ! "
sighed Meg , looking down at her old dress .
" I do n't think it 's fair for some girls to have plenty of pretty things , and other girls nothing at all , " added little Amy , with an injured sniff .
" We 've got Father and Mother , and each other , " said Beth contentedly from her corner .
The four young faces on which the firelight shone brightened at the cheerful words , but darkened again as Jo said sadly , " We have n't got Father , and shall not have him for a long time . "
She did n't say " perhaps never , " but each silently added it , thinking of Father far away , where the fighting was .
Nobody spoke for a minute ; then Meg said in an altered tone , " You know the reason Mother proposed not having any presents this Christmas was because it is going to be a hard winter for everyone ; and she thinks we ought not to spend money for pleasure , when our men are suffering so in the army .
We ca n't do much , but we can make our little sacrifices , and ought to do it gladly .
But I am afraid I do n't , " and Meg shook her head , as she thought regretfully of all the pretty things she wanted .
" But I do n't think the little we should spend would do any good .
We 've each got a dollar , and the army would n't be much helped by our giving that .
I agree not to expect anything from Mother or you , but I do want to buy _ Undine and Sintran _ for myself .
I 've wanted it so long , " said Jo , who was a bookworm .
" I planned to spend mine in new music , " said Beth , with a little sigh , which no one heard but the hearth brush and kettle-holder .
" I shall get a nice box of Faber 's drawing pencils ; I really need them , " said Amy decidedly .
" Mother did n't say anything about our money , and she wo n't wish us to give up everything .
Let 's each buy what we want , and have a little fun ; I 'm sure we work hard enough to earn it , " cried Jo , examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner .
" I know I do -- teaching those tiresome children nearly all day , when I 'm longing to enjoy myself at home , " began Meg , in the complaining tone again .
" You do n't have half such a hard time as I do , " said Jo .
" How would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous , fussy old lady , who keeps you trotting , is never satisfied , and worries you till you 're ready to fly out the window or cry ? "
" It 's naughty to fret , but I do think washing dishes and keeping things tidy is the worst work in the world .
It makes me cross , and my hands get so stiff , I ca n't practice well at all . "
And Beth looked at her rough hands with a sigh that any one could hear that time .
" I do n't believe any of you suffer as I do , " cried Amy , " for you do n't have to go to school with impertinent girls , who plague you if you do n't know your lessons , and laugh at your dresses , and label your father if he is n't rich , and insult you when your nose is n't nice . "
" If you mean libel , I 'd say so , and not talk about labels , as if Papa was a pickle bottle , " advised Jo , laughing .
" I know what I mean , and you need n't be statirical about it .
It 's proper to use good words , and improve your vocabilary , " returned Amy , with dignity .
" Do n't peck at one another , children .
Do n't you wish we had the money Papa lost when we were little , Jo ?
Dear me !
How happy and good we 'd be , if we had no worries ! "
said Meg , who could remember better times .
" You said the other day you thought we were a deal happier than the King children , for they were fighting and fretting all the time , in spite of their money . "
" So I did , Beth .
Well , I think we are .
For though we do have to work , we make fun of ourselves , and are a pretty jolly set , as Jo would say . "
" Jo does use such slang words ! "
observed Amy , with a reproving look at the long figure stretched on the rug .
Jo immediately sat up , put her hands in her pockets , and began to whistle .
" Do n't , Jo .
It 's so boyish ! "
" That 's why I do it . "
" I detest rude , unladylike girls ! "
" I hate affected , niminy-piminy chits ! "
" Birds in their little nests agree , " sang Beth , the peacemaker , with such a funny face that both sharp voices softened to a laugh , and the " pecking " ended for that time .
" Really , girls , you are both to be blamed , " said Meg , beginning to lecture in her elder-sisterly fashion .
" You are old enough to leave off boyish tricks , and to behave better , Josephine .
It did n't matter so much when you were a little girl , but now you are so tall , and turn up your hair , you should remember that you are a young lady . "
" I 'm not !
And if turning up my hair makes me one , I 'll wear it in two tails till I 'm twenty , " cried Jo , pulling off her net , and shaking down a chestnut mane .
" I hate to think I 've got to grow up , and be Miss March , and wear long gowns , and look as prim as a China Aster !
It 's bad enough to be a girl , anyway , when I like boy 's games and work and manners !
I ca n't get over my disappointment in not being a boy .
And it 's worse than ever now , for I 'm dying to go and fight with Papa .
And I can only stay home and knit , like a poky old woman ! "
And Jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled like castanets , and her ball bounded across the room .
" Poor Jo !
It 's too bad , but it ca n't be helped .
So you must try to be contented with making your name boyish , and playing brother to us girls , " said Beth , stroking the rough head with a hand that all the dish washing and dusting in the world could not make ungentle in its touch .
" As for you , Amy , " continued Meg , " you are altogether too particular and prim .
Your airs are funny now , but you 'll grow up an affected little goose , if you do n't take care .
I like your nice manners and refined ways of speaking , when you do n't try to be elegant .
But your absurd words are as bad as Jo 's slang . "
" If Jo is a tomboy and Amy a goose , what am I , please ? "
asked Beth , ready to share the lecture .
" You 're a dear , and nothing else , " answered Meg warmly , and no one contradicted her , for the ' Mouse ' was the pet of the family .
As young readers like to know ' how people look ' , we will take this moment to give them a little sketch of the four sisters , who sat knitting away in the twilight , while the December snow fell quietly without , and the fire crackled cheerfully within .
It was a comfortable room , though the carpet was faded and the furniture very plain , for a good picture or two hung on the walls , books filled the recesses , chrysanthemums and Christmas roses bloomed in the windows , and a pleasant atmosphere of home peace pervaded it .
Margaret , the eldest of the four , was sixteen , and very pretty , being plump and fair , with large eyes , plenty of soft brown hair , a sweet mouth , and white hands , of which she was rather vain .
Fifteen-year-old Jo was very tall , thin , and brown , and reminded one of a colt , for she never seemed to know what to do with her long limbs , which were very much in her way .
She had a decided mouth , a comical nose , and sharp , gray eyes , which appeared to see everything , and were by turns fierce , funny , or thoughtful .
Her long , thick hair was her one beauty , but it was usually bundled into a net , to be out of her way .
Round shoulders had Jo , big hands and feet , a flyaway look to her clothes , and the uncomfortable appearance of a girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman and did n't like it .
Elizabeth , or Beth , as everyone called her , was a rosy , smooth-haired , bright-eyed girl of thirteen , with a shy manner , a timid voice , and a peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed .
Her father called her ' Little Miss Tranquility ' , and the name suited her excellently , for she seemed to live in a happy world of her own , only venturing out to meet the few whom she trusted and loved .
Amy , though the youngest , was a most important person , in her own opinion at least .
A regular snow maiden , with blue eyes , and yellow hair curling on her shoulders , pale and slender , and always carrying herself like a young lady mindful of her manners .
What the characters of the four sisters were we will leave to be found out .
The clock struck six and , having swept up the hearth , Beth put a pair of slippers down to warm .
Somehow the sight of the old shoes had a good effect upon the girls , for Mother was coming , and everyone brightened to welcome her .
Meg stopped lecturing , and lighted the lamp , Amy got out of the easy chair without being asked , and Jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold the slippers nearer to the blaze .
" They are quite worn out .
Marmee must have a new pair . "
" I thought I 'd get her some with my dollar , " said Beth .
