A cloudy day : do you know what that is in a town of iron-works ?
The sky sank down before dawn , muddy , flat , immovable .
The air is thick , clammy with the breath of crowded human beings .
It stifles me .
I open the window , and , looking out , can scarcely see through the rain the grocer 's shop opposite , where a crowd of drunken Irishmen are puffing Lynchburg tobacco in their pipes .
I can detect the scent through all the foul smells ranging loose in the air .
The idiosyncrasy of this town is smoke .
It rolls sullenly in slow folds from the great chimneys of the iron-foundries , and settles down in black , slimy pools on the muddy streets .
Smoke on the wharves , smoke on the dingy boats , on the yellow river , -- clinging in a coating of greasy soot to the house-front , the two faded poplars , the faces of the passers-by .
The long train of mules , dragging masses of pig-iron through the narrow street , have a foul vapor hanging to their reeking sides .
Here , inside , is a little broken figure of an angel pointing upward from the mantel-shelf ; but even its wings are covered with smoke , clotted and black .
Smoke everywhere !
A dirty canary chirps desolately in a cage beside me .
Its dream of green fields and sunshine is a very old dream , -- almost worn out , I think .
From the back-window I can see a narrow brick-yard sloping down to the river-side , strewed with rain-butts and tubs .
The river , dull and tawny-colored , ( la belle riviere ! )
drags itself sluggishly along , tired of the heavy weight of boats and coal-barges .
What wonder ?
When I was a child , I used to fancy a look of weary , dumb appeal upon the face of the negro-like river slavishly bearing its burden day after day .
Something of the same idle notion comes to me to-day , when from the street-window I look on the slow stream of human life creeping past , night and morning , to the great mills .
Masses of men , with dull , besotted faces bent to the ground , sharpened here and there by pain or cunning ; skin and muscle and flesh begrimed with smoke and ashes ; stooping all night over boiling caldrons of metal , laired by day in dens of drunkenness and infamy ; breathing from infancy to death an air saturated with fog and grease and soot , vileness for soul and body .
What do you make of a case like that , amateur psychologist ?
You call it an altogether serious thing to be alive : to these men it is a drunken jest , a joke , -- horrible to angels perhaps , to them commonplace enough .
My fancy about the river was an idle one : it is no type of such a life .
What if it be stagnant and slimy here ?
It knows that beyond there waits for it odorous sunlight , quaint old gardens , dusky with soft , green foliage of apple-trees , and flushing crimson with roses , -- air , and fields , and mountains .
The future of the Welsh puddler passing just now is not so pleasant .
To be stowed away , after his grimy work is done , in a hole in the muddy graveyard , and after that , not air , nor green fields , nor curious roses .
Can you see how foggy the day is ?
As I stand here , idly tapping the windowpane , and looking out through the rain at the dirty back-yard and the coalboats below , fragments of an old story float up before me , -- a story of this house into which I happened to come to-day .
You may think it a tiresome story enough , as foggy as the day , sharpened by no sudden flashes of pain or pleasure .
-- I know : only the outline of a dull life , that long since , with thousands of dull lives like its own , was vainly lived and lost : thousands of them , massed , vile , slimy lives , like those of the torpid lizards in yonder stagnant water-butt .
-- Lost ?
There is a curious point for you to settle , my friend , who study psychology in a lazy , dilettante way .
Stop a moment .
I am going to be honest .
This is what I want you to do .
I want you to hide your disgust , take no heed to your clean clothes , and come right down with me , -- here , into the thickest of the fog and mud and foul effluvia .
I want you to hear this story .
There is a secret down here , in this nightmare fog , that has lain dumb for centuries : I want to make it a real thing to you .
You , Egoist , or Pantheist , or Arminian , busy in making straight paths for your feet on the hills , do not see it clearly , -- this terrible question which men here have gone mad and died trying to answer .
I dare not put this secret into words .
I told you it was dumb .
These men , going by with drunken faces and brains full of unawakened power , do not ask it of Society or of God .
Their lives ask it ; their deaths ask it .
There is no reply .
I will tell you plainly that I have a great hope ; and I bring it to you to be tested .
It is this : that this terrible dumb question is its own reply ; that it is not the sentence of death we think it , but , from the very extremity of its darkness , the most solemn prophecy which the world has known of the Hope to come .
I dare make my meaning no clearer , but will only tell my story .
It will , perhaps , seem to you as foul and dark as this thick vapor about us , and as pregnant with death ; but if your eyes are free as mine are to look deeper , no perfume-tinted dawn will be so fair with promise of the day that shall surely come .
My story is very simple , -- Only what I remember of the life of one of these men , -- a furnace-tender in one of Kirby & John 's rolling-mills , -- Hugh Wolfe .
You know the mills ?
They took the great order for the lower Virginia railroads there last winter ; run usually with about a thousand men .
I can not tell why I choose the half-forgotten story of this Wolfe more than that of myriads of these furnace-hands .
Perhaps because there is a secret , underlying sympathy between that story and this day with its impure fog and thwarted sunshine , -- or perhaps simply for the reason that this house is the one where the Wolfes lived .
There were the father and son , -- both hands , as I said , in one of Kirby & John 's mills for making railroad-iron , -- and Deborah , their cousin , a picker in some of the cotton-mills .
The house was rented then to half a dozen families .
The Wolfes had two of the cellar-rooms .
The old man , like many of the puddlers and feeders of the mills , was Welsh , -- had spent half of his life in the Cornish tin-mines .
You may pick the Welsh emigrants , Cornish miners , out of the throng passing the windows , any day .
They are a trifle more filthy ; their muscles are not so brawny ; they stoop more .
When they are drunk , they neither yell , nor shout , nor stagger , but skulk along like beaten hounds .
A pure , unmixed blood , I fancy : shows itself in the slight angular bodies and sharply-cut facial lines .
It is nearly thirty years since the Wolfes lived here .
Their lives were like those of their class : incessant labor , sleeping in kennel-like rooms , eating rank pork and molasses , drinking -- God and the distillers only know what ; with an occasional night in jail , to atone for some drunken excess .
Is that all of their lives ?
-- of the portion given to them and these their duplicates swarming the streets to-day ?
-- nothing beneath ?
-- all ?
So many a political reformer will tell you , -- and many a private reformer , too , who has gone among them with a heart tender with Christ 's charity , and come out outraged , hardened .
One rainy night , about eleven o'clock , a crowd of half-clothed women stopped outside of the cellar-door .
They were going home from the cotton-mill .
“ Good-night , Deb , ” said one , a mulatto , steadying herself against the gas-post .
She needed the post to steady her .
So did more than one of them .
“ Dah 's a ball to Miss Potts ' to-night .
Ye 'd best come . ”
“ Inteet , Deb , if hur 'll come , hur 'll hef fun , ” said a shrill Welsh voice in the crowd .
Two or three dirty hands were thrust out to catch the gown of the woman , who was groping for the latch of the door .
“ No . ”
“ No ?
Where 's Kit Small , then ? ”
“ Begorra !
on the spools .
Alleys behint , though we helped her , we dud .
An wid ye !
Let Deb alone !
It 's ondacent frettin ' a quite body .
Be the powers , an we 'll have a night of it !
there 'll be lashin 's o ' drink , -- the Vargent be blessed and praised for ' t ! ”
They went on , the mulatto inclining for a moment to show fight , and drag the woman Wolfe off with them ; but , being pacified , she staggered away .
Deborah groped her way into the cellar , and , after considerable stumbling , kindled a match , and lighted a tallow dip , that sent a yellow glimmer over the room .
It was low , damp , -- the earthen floor covered with a green , slimy moss , -- a fetid air smothering the breath .
Old Wolfe lay asleep on a heap of straw , wrapped in a torn horse-blanket .
He was a pale , meek little man , with a white face and red rabbit-eyes .
The woman Deborah was like him ; only her face was even more ghastly , her lips bluer , her eyes more watery .
She wore a faded cotton gown and a slouching bonnet .
When she walked , one could see that she was deformed , almost a hunchback .
She trod softly , so as not to waken him , and went through into the room beyond .
There she found by the half-extinguished fire an iron saucepan filled with cold boiled potatoes , which she put upon a broken chair with a pint-cup of ale .
Placing the old candlestick beside this dainty repast , she untied her bonnet , which hung limp and wet over her face , and prepared to eat her supper .
It was the first food that had touched her lips since morning .
There was enough of it , however : there is not always .
She was hungry , -- one could see that easily enough , -- and not drunk , as most of her companions would have been found at this hour .
She did not drink , this woman , -- her face told that , too , -- nothing stronger than ale .
Perhaps the weak , flaccid wretch had some stimulant in her pale life to keep her up , -- some love or hope , it might be , or urgent need .
When that stimulant was gone , she would take to whiskey .
Man can not live by work alone .
While she was skinning the potatoes , and munching them , a noise behind her made her stop .
